<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 7</h2>
                                <h3>Dorothy Visits Phoenix–Washington <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr> Fasting⁠–⁠August Hiroshima Fast⁠</h3>
                                <h3>1950</h3>
                                <hr>Phoenix⁠–⁠Washington, <abbr class="postal eoc">D.C.</abbr>⁠–⁠Mott <abbr class="eoc">St.</abbr>⁠–⁠Hopiland</h4>
			</header>
			<p>I had not met Dorothy since September 1941 in Milwaukee. I had written letters to her and the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Catholic Worker</i>. She had come to Albuquerque a few months after I left for Phoenix in 1947. Now I was overjoyed to get a card from her saying that she would be here <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 29th. I met her at the bus. She had been a chain smoker until 1940 and now that she had quit as a penance she had a relaxed and peaceful countenance instead of that nervousness that goes with cigarettes. She stayed at Rik’s. On New Year’s Day we both met Father George Dunne, nephew of Finley Peter Dunne, the humorist, and now at <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis Xavier church here. He had been changed from <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis to Los Angeles and now to Phoenix because he was ahead of the ecclesiastical authorities on the race issue. He is not a pacifist nor an anarchist, but a fine brave man. We went with Father Rook to the Indian Yaqui mission in the desert southeast of Tempe. Here the Indians who are very poor had built this church or rather had added to the old one⁠—and all without any games of chance or bingo parties.</p>
			<p>The leading anarchist of this country happened to be in Phoenix just then, so I asked him if he and his atheistic Italian anarchist friends would like to meet Dorothy. Accordingly we met one evening in an anarchist home. The atheistic anarchists led off by saying that anarchism as defined by Bakunin negates all authority: that of the state and that of God. Therefore for Christian and especially Catholic anarchists to use the name “anarchism” is unethical. Furthermore it hurts the feelings of Italian anarchists who have felt the lash of the Catholic hierarchy.</p>
			<p>Dorothy listened carefully to this reiterated statement and replied that this argument had not been brought to her attention before and deserved careful consideration. She felt that man of his own free will accepted God or rejected God and if a man chose to obey the authority of God and reject the authority of the state it was not unethical to do so. She inferred that we were <em>born into</em> a state and could not help it, but accepted God of our own free will. She and Bob Ludlow are converts to the Church.</p>
			<p>The atheistic anarchist answer was that it was entirely illogical to use the anarchist conception of freedom to accept the authority of God which denies that freedom. Dorothy felt that the authority of God only made her a better rebel and gave her courage to oppose those who sought to carry over the concept of authority from the supernatural to the natural field where it did not belong. She said that the use of the word “anarchism” by the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> might shock people; that Peter Maurin, although an anarchist, had generally used the word “personalist” instead, but she felt that Bob Ludlow and myself used it rightly.</p>
			<p>Another anarchist present thought that Ludlow had slipped over the use of the word “anarchism” on Dorothy. She replied that she stood back of all he said on the subject. This same anarchist repeated the regular argument that religion was opium for the people and that the Catholic Church always stood for the rich against the poor and that the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> was as bad as the history of the church. The anarchist leader felt that if the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> was only called the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Anarchist Worker</i> instead of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> it would be the best anarchist paper going. It was the word “Catholic” that spoiled it. These atheistic anarchists felt that if I had not hid behind the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> I would have been arrested long ago for my tax refusal. Dorothy answered that I had been a Christian Anarchist long before the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> was ever heard of. The anarchist leader said that Tolstoy in his <i epub:type="se:name:publication:essay">Appeal to Social Reformers</i> denounced the regular anarchists of his time and therefore should not be considered an anarchist.</p>
			<p>I replied that I had read that article of Tolstoy’s long ago and that Tolstoy was simply decrying the atheism and violence of various types of anarchists, and saying that without pacifism and the Fatherhood of God there could not be an effective anarchistic brotherhood of man. I also quoted from a book <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Tolstoy the Man</i> by <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Stirner, issued by Fleming Revel <abbr>Co.</abbr> about 1902. <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Stirner visited with Tolstoy and quoted him as saying that he was such an anarchist as Jesus and the Sermon on the Mount had made him; not to be afraid of the word anarchism, for the time would come when people would know its true meaning; that one who had accepted and obeyed the laws of God was thereby divorced from obeying the laws of men and did not need them. Stirner was sort of a Fabian Socialist, and he asked Tolstoy if Socialism was not a step on the way to anarchism. Tolstoy answered that it was not, and that it would end in a terrible dictatorship.</p>
			<p>Dorothy mentioned the sacrifice of Jesus on the cross, original sin, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, emphasizing the fact that rebels who sacrifice for a cause need this supernatural help to remain true. The anarchists misunderstood this idea or else were physically unable to accept the importance of sacrifice, saying that what they wanted was better material conditions and not pie in the sky; that religion made people willing slaves. Under pressure from Dorothy and myself they admitted that a good martyr now and then, like the Haymarket men and Sacco and Vanzetti, was a good thing, but they did not like the emphasis upon sacrifice.</p>
			<p>I felt that this was the trouble with the present atheistic anarchists: that they were not willing to sacrifice enough. I reviewed my prison history to prove that what changed me from being a Socialist and an atheist was the example of that true rebel Jesus. That thus my sanity had been saved, and I had emerged from prison an anarchist. That I was associated with the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> because of its brave stand in publicizing my anti-tax campaign when anarchist and pacifist papers said very little about it. That my idea of God was not an authority whom I obeyed like a monarch but a principle of good as laid down by Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount, which I interpreted in day by day decisions as the forces of the state came in conflict with these ideals. And that in the same manner every person had to make a choice between his conception of good and of evil.</p>
                        <p>The anarchist leader still felt that religious people had no right to use the word “anarchist,” although we knew that he as an anarchist could not go to law and prevent it. I replied that the atheistic anarchists were more atheistic than they were anarchistic so he should not be adverse to allowing Christians or Catholic Christians to be at least as religious as they were anarchistic, if not more so. That the atheistic anarchist should be glad that the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> had left the state-worship of ecclesiastical authorities and were anarchists. I said that the atheistic anarchists did not realize that it was possible for a Catholic to accept spiritual authority and not⁠—like most Catholics⁠—accept the state and temporal authority; that the atheistic anarchist should be glad that someone was fighting authority in one sphere⁠—and the most difficult sphere at that⁠—where the atheistic anarchist stood no chance of being heard. Dorothy told of losing over half of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> subscribers because the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> opposed Franco and World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.</p>
			<p>The summary of Bob Ludlow on this subject seems conclusive: “There is an incompatibility between anarchism and religion only if the Christian insists on transforming the authoritarian set-up of the Church to the temporal field, or the anarchist insists in rejecting authority in religion. In both cases it comes from a confusion of the supernatural with the natural.”</p>
			<p>As two of those present were vegetarians, our Italian hosts gave us all that diet. Despite the excitability of the Italian temperament there was good humor and goodwill present at all times. I felt that a fair summary of the question would be that whenever we of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> became cowardly because of pressure from the Pope, then it would be time for atheistic anarchists to decry our use of the name “anarchism.” And that as long as they had no Pope to tell them what to do they ought to assert their native anarchism and come out and be as brave fighters against war and capitalism as were Bakunin, Berkman, and Goldman, whom they revere.</p>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>The I Am Activity</h3>
			<p>About this time I had a letter from a teacher in Fairhope, <abbr class="postal">Ala.</abbr> where I had taught in 1924. Her name was Miss DaPonte and she had refused to pay taxes. She told of some boys, Quakers whose parents I had taught when I was there, who had refused to register. The judge in Mobile told the boys: “Well, you pay your taxes, don’t you? And a large amount of our taxes goes for war purposes. If you were consistent in carrying out this belief, you would also refuse to pay your taxes.”</p>
			<p>The main “shrine” of the cult which my wife and daughters follow is at <abbr>Mt.</abbr> Shasta in California. I had written every week to my family, and after the girls had been sufficiently indoctrinated in this cult no letters were written by them to me until 1949 when they met me in San Francisco. I did not blame them and even hoped that my wife would get over this infatuation with fake religion, as she had with numerous other cults. She had been raised in the atmosphere of envy of the rich, which is the motivation of too many radicals. Despite my talk of Tolstoy and refusal to cooperate with government, she had never appreciated the real basis of religion as given in the Sermon on the Mount. I was not sure if my girls received the letters and enclosures of articles I had written.</p>
			<p>Now, after twelve years of separation I felt that morally my wife and I were divorced although legally we were married by the common law of New York state. I do not believe in either marriage or divorce by the state so naturally would not seek a divorce. I remembered the good times we had when hiking those four years, and of the early days in the woods where the girls were born in Wisconsin. If she was happy with this patriotic and materialistic religion I had no right and, I felt now, no purpose in bothering her. So I wrote to the girls each week but not directly to her. With my Life at Hard Labor, vegetarian diet, and mind on The One Man Revolution, I did not have to have physical contact with any woman. I had work to do, and despaired of finding any woman who could stand the pace and who would not seek to tame me.</p>
			<p>This did not mean that emotionally, and in a platonic manner, I had no attachment in my mind toward a certain woman. I had not seen her for nine years and had written often but received a reply only a few times a year. In a few days of conversation we had been able to understand that we had a common devotion to both pacifism and anarchism; and, sad necessity or undue asceticism as it might appear to others, a common practice of a celibate life. She had helped me to formulate my ideas on tax refusal more clearly and, almost alone, had publicized them. She had never once mentioned the subject of joining the Catholic church to me, simply saying that she always prayed for me along with many others. I also included her in my non-church prayers for years. So when Dorothy left, I felt a new reason for continuing my One Man Revolution.</p>
			<p>I had become a radical the same year that Tolstoy died. I had a letter and a card from Gandhi in 1934 when he was in prison. I had written to him⁠—“Gandhi. India.”⁠—and he received it. I had never met these great spiritual leaders, yet loved them. How much more, then, should I appreciate one such leader who was a contemporary and whom I had known for thirteen years. At my age in life the fact that she was a woman did not make as much difference as it would have twenty years before. The men I had known in my radical life had either all turned bourgeois, married women who had tamed them, or had died. So it was natural that I should enjoy the companionship of the one person I knew who lived the ideals which I believed.</p>
                        <p>In 1941⁠–⁠42 I had walked ten miles each Sunday evening to attend a Quaker meeting. Here in Phoenix the Quaker meeting was held in the morning when I would normally be selling <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s. If there had been one at night I would have attended. As it was I felt the need of spiritual strength in my picketing so attended mass and prayed for peace and wisdom before picketing. In the spring of 1949 the scabbing of seminarians per orders of Cardinal Spellman in the graveyard strike in <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> City aroused me. The opposition of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> to this disobedience of the famous Encyclicals of the Pope, and their picketing of <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s Cathedral, caused me to wish to praise God for such brave action. The best place to praise God was in the Catholic Church so from that time forward I prayed for grace and wisdom at mass, wherever I was selling <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s. But I still had the regular Protestant attitude toward the Catholic church, as being the worst of them all.</p>
                        </section>
			<hr/>
			<p>Around this time there was a Brotherhood meeting in the first Methodist Church downtown. Levi Udall, Chief Justice of the Arizona Supreme Court, was to speak for the Mormons. Frank Toothaker, <abbr>Supt.</abbr> of the Methodist Church in this district, and a pacifist of many years, was to speak for the Protestants. A leader of the Jewish charities, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kaplan, was speaking for the Jews, and <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Xavier Harris was speaking for the Catholics. It has always been my custom to read the daily papers carefully to see who is invading my territory, so when these leaders announced that they would speak on Brotherhood I wrote each of them a personal letter telling them that if they talked of Brotherhood and followed their respective churches in supporting war I would get up and say something about it if I had a chance. Also I enclosed my current leaflet and told them that I would be selling <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s outside of the church that night. The Mormon and the Jew came first and greeted me cordially and took a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Toothaker had already read the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and I found that <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Harris had taken it for years.</p>
			<p>There are many good things to say about the Mormons: their canning of waste food, their social life around the church, and their tithing. But Judge Udall gave a Fourth of July speech, with little depth or religion or real patriotism. The Jew seemed apologetic and rambled on, seeming to want to say something without hurting the feelings of anyone. <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Toothaker did not say anything that was especially wrong but sidestepped anything of importance. <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Harris gave a real spiritual message but I doubt if many who were there appreciated it, including myself. There was no opportunity for questions. Later I became acquainted with <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Harris and found him an understanding radical of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> type, although not accepting pacifism and anarchism with capital letters.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>At this time the priest in charge at the big <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis Xavier Church here did not allow me to sell <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s there. Friends told me that <abbr>Fr.</abbr> George Dunne, on <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 5th at mass, had told of the visit of Dorothy and myself to him early in <abbr class="eoc">Jan.</abbr> He said that he did not agree with us but he praised the courage and holy life led by Dorothy, gave a summary of my prison experiences, and announced the picketing which I would do on March 14th at the office of the Collector of Internal Revenue. At this time most of the local pacifists seemed afraid to be seen with me in public, and of course none of the ministers who said they believed in peace dared mention that there was a person in town who did not pay taxes openly.</p>
			<hr/>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Tax Picketing</h3>
				<p>Joe Mueller was a house painter but dabbled in portraits. He made a huge oil painting of an airplane dropping a bomb, and of a battlefield and a graveyard with crosses. I could not get in a bus with such a sign. Having no other means of transportation, I got up early and walked the ten miles into Phoenix with my two signs, pairs and leaflets, arriving by 8 <abbr class="time eoc">a.m.</abbr> The small yellow leaflet which I handed out was rather saucy and not a masterpiece. Rik varityped it. It read:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<h4>Why Am I Picketing?</h4>
					<p>Well, why aren’t you? Do the <abbr class="initialism">A</abbr>-Bomb and the <abbr class="initialism">H</abbr>-Bomb make you sleep any better at night? Do you trust our politicians to protect us from destruction in an atomic war? Does it make good sense to foot the bill by paying income taxes?</p>
					<p>I am not paying my income tax this year, and I haven’t done so for the last seven years. I don’t expect to stop World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> by my refusal to pay, but I don’t believe in paying for something I don’t believe in⁠—do you?</p>
					<p>Do you believe that anyone ever “won” a war? Or that any good can come from returning evil for evil? I don’t believe it! And I don’t believe I need preachers or policemen to make me behave, either.</p>
					<p>I do believe in personal responsibility, and that’s why I am picketing. Why aren’t you?</p>
					<p>Ammon <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Hennacy, <abbr class="initialism">R.</abbr> 3, Box 221, March 14, 1950</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Many people told me to go back to Russia. The wind blew and I was tired out, holding the big sign. The other sign told of the taxes that went for war and my refusal to pay taxes. The police did not bother me. A few people were sympathetic. One Catholic stopped me and said that Catholics had a bad enough time without my getting them in worse with such radicalism. I told him that I was not a Catholic but if I was I had a right to picket. He wanted to know if any priests supported my activity. I told him that Father Dunne did not agree with my ideas but had announced this very picketing at mass on <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 5th. “God bless you, then!” he smiled as he went on his way.</p>
				<p>I was very tired by night and was glad when Rik drove me home. Joe had waited until my picketing was over and returned to Chicago the next day with his painting of the airplane that I had carried. The next day the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Arizona Republic</i> had a column by Columbus Giragi, old time newspaper man, deriding my picketing and saying that I should be locked up. I wrote to him and told him of two prominent men who disagreed with me but who were my good friends, and advised him to ask them about my sincerity. He did so and asked me to call upon him.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Fasting in Washington, <abbr class="postal eoc">D.C.</abbr></h3>
				<p>Joe Craigmyle felt poor after his release from prison, so he departed from his ordinary life of fruit stand operator to help me rassle 65 pound cement blocks under the beams of the frame house of the Old Pioneer. This was only a job for thin men so Joe and I qualified. We snaked here and there among the gopher holes and skunk apartments for ten days until the job was finished. Meanwhile we had notice from pacifist headquarters in New York that all varieties of pacifists were going to fast during Holy Week and picket the White House in Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr>, against the piling up of atom bombs. If it had been just ordinary picketing I would not have bothered for I could always do that in Phoenix. The <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> would be represented which would lend some spirituality to the project, and this would be an opportunity for me to picket the head of the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Revenue office in Washington.</p>
				<p>The Hopi had spoken of wishing to protest against the inclusion of their name in the Navajo⁠–⁠Hopi bill, so I wrote to my Hopi friend telling him I would collect money for his expenses from radical Catholics and pacifists here if he would accompany me. I told the Old Pioneer that I would leave on the 26th of March. Joe is slow to make up his mind on anything and would not say whether he would go or not. When I got word that my Hopi friend was going, Joe decided that we three should go in his Willys pickup.</p>
				<p>I already had my summer garden planted, except melons and later crops, and irrigated it on Saturday. That evening Joe came out and got my sleeping bag. Rik made some picketing signs for me and we were there for supper. About 10:45 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> we received a phone call that my Hopi friend and Dan Kuchongva, spiritual leader of the traditional Hopi, were in town and would be over in a few minutes. They brought bed rolls with them and piki bread. Rik’s children were wide-eyed to see real Indians. We left at 7 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> Sunday. I reclined in the back, partly under blankets. We stopped at the Catholic church in Tempe where our good <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> priests, Bechtel and Rook, held forth, and said a prayer for the success of our journey. Dan sang Hopi prayers and Joe and I thought the best we could do was to say our pacifist⁠–⁠anarchist, non-church prayers. Near Florence we s awbeautiful cactus blossoms peeping through to enliven the desert. (Mother Bloor had hiked over the country at the age of 65 and said the most beautiful spot was this very place.) Before we got to Tucson it was snowing and raining and I shivered to think how far we were from our destination.</p>
				<p>We went to the home of Ralph, a Hopi silversmith who had done time in chains at Keams Canyon years ago with Dan for non-cooperation with the white conqueror whose policy it was to kidnap the Hopi children and send them to missionary schools. His wife and daughter prepared us an excellent meal and as the rain let up we built the back of the pickup into a secure and nearly rainproof shelter for the one whose turn it would be to sleep there while the other three sat in front.</p>
				<p>By 3 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> we were headed for El Paso. We had intended to take the middle route through Meredian, <abbr class="postal">Miss.</abbr>, but storms in that vicinity sent us southward. A little later the sun shone through the clouds for the first time that day and Dan stopped and placed eagle feathers along the road side, saying the appropriate prayers for our journey. He also scattered sacred corn meal before the car and about ten paces ahead, with prayers. Joe and my Hopi friend took turns driving and we did not stop except for coffee or gas until just before dark when we arrived at <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Herbert Shelton’s rest home in San Antonio. He had told me to stop and he would give me free copies of his <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Hygienic Review</i> dealing with fasting, which is a basic therapy in his conquering of the disease of people who finally, like the woman in the scripture, “suffer from many physicians.” He was not in just then but later Joe and I visited him and found him most gracious. He said that at times he felt more anarchistic and at other times more socialistic. He was not religious in the church sense, but strange as it seemed to us opposed birth control because it was unnatural. He felt that the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> program “coddled the unfit,” but we did not argue with him for we felt that on the subject of health he was the master, and he did not pretend to be an ethical expert. We found later that a non-radical from Phoenix took a fast of 58 days and was cured of a number of diseases, any one of which could have killed him. Whether he went back to a diet of white bread, white sugar, liquor, cigarettes, and canned goods and got sick again we did not know. Rest along with fasting and absolutely no medicine or vaccines is his method.</p>
				<p>Here in San Antonio we looked up my roommate of 1955 at the University of Wisconsin, Bill Brockhausen, whom my wife and I had visited in 1923 when we were hiking. He was an advertising executive with a big house and servants headquarters where the Hopi soon were sleeping peacefully. Bill and I sat up until early morning talking over old times. His father had been a Milwaukee Socialist of the old school and Bill had been a natural political compromiser. He greeted me gladly in the midst of that product which has made Milwaukee famous. I had always been an extreme radical in his eyes and I suppose brought back visions of Debs and the old days before he had become so prosperous. In his overflowing good nature he told me to make his home my picketing headquarters if I ever came to Texas to live. Then his old conservatism coming up he said, “You don’t do anything constructive, Ammon. Here you are roaming the country with two Indians.” I did not argue the point with my extra extrovert friend. We left early without waking him.</p>
				<p>We bought some bananas at Houston, massive town of skyscrapers, and left <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s at a Catholic church near where we stopped. All along we gave copies of the <abbr>Feb.</abbr> <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, explaining that the Indians mentioned in my article on the Hopi were the ones with us. I had the address of Dorothy DaPonte, a tax refuser in Mobile. She had moved but when we drove into Fairhope across the bay, where I had taught history in the high school 26 years before, we found that Miss DaPonte was a teacher there. She came of an old southern family and nearly caused her father to have a nervous breakdown last year when she refused to pay taxes and had bravely escorted a young Negro girl to the front seat with her in a Methodist Church. By now her father was getting used to her, only deploring that there were no others in the community who also refused to pay taxes. Two teachers at the school planned to fast with us although they had to stay there and teach. Miss DaPonte would have liked to have come along but had to stay as a witness in some trial about segregation. As many do who are new in a movement she asked why I did not fast-to-the-death on the White House steps against the <abbr class="initialism">H</abbr>-Bomb. I felt that if such an act came as the natural conclusion of holy life it would be worthwhile if the persecution came from the State as it did in Gandhi’s case. It was nothing to be entered into lightly, but required much prayer and fasting.</p>
				<p>Several times when we became lost Dan would point a certain way and this would be the right direction. He did not know one state from another and could not read signs but he had a sense of direction. At midnight in Atlanta midst sewer repairs he knew where he was going and we didn’t. Toward morning we came to Clarkesville, <abbr class="postal">Ga.</abbr> and soon to the 800 acres of the Macedonia Cooperative Community. Here my old friend and social worker from Milwaukee, Dave Newton, and his brave beautiful wife, Ginny, were members of this adventure in living. Before the first draft in 1940 we had discussed non-registration, but Dave was a liberal, not a radical; he registered and spent about four years in <abbr class="initialism">CPS</abbr>. About the time the war was over he walked out of <abbr class="initialism">CPS</abbr> and was in Sandstone prison with Bill Ryan and Walter Gormly. He was paroled out to Macedonia. All of the families here were <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>s, many of them also vegetarians. Here each family lives in a separate house and breakfast is at home. Coffee at 10 in the common room for those who desire it and a common meal at noon is the rule. Supper is generally at home. There is a common storeroom where such items as have to be purchased are kept. Each one has a key and can take what they like without anyone else knowing about it, only they mark the amount taken on a chart so the stock can be renewed without sudden famine occurring. The main source of income here is children’s building blocks and other play apparatus.</p>
				<p>Expensive machinery helps in this production. Del Franchen, who was already fasting and who would go to Washington for a few days as he made a return trip with furniture, was one of two who attended to a small dairy. They furnished milk for all in Macedonia and living expenses of the two families who attended to the cows. A few garden patches were cleared. One family had lived here for about three years but finally decided that such a life was not for them. It is difficult to find both man and wife who will put up with the deprivations and hard work necessary to make community life a success. For young folks who are raising children it is an ideal place⁠—that is until the arguments commence about private or public school and the desire to raise children for success in a bourgeois world. If I was thirty and had a wife who could take it I would choose to live here, but as it is and I am single I favor living “out in the world” and doing my propaganda among the “heathen.” We left about 9 <abbr class="time eoc">p.m.</abbr></p>
				<p>The Hopi wished to visit the remnants of Tsali’s tribe who by their rebellion in 1828 had not been deported with the other Cherokee to Indian Territory, so we went the long and mountainous way to Cherokee. We knocked on all doors about 2:30 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> but could arouse no one. Likely the unreconstructed did not live on this sign-decked highway that catered to tourists so perhaps we did not miss anything.</p>
				<p>Winding around the beautiful Smokies and asking numerous directions we finally brushed alongside a wagon where armed guards were bossing a chain gang in road-mending. Finally we met tall and well-built Tilly Brooks, wife of the <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr> Arle Brooks, of whom Judge Welch spoke in Philadelphia in 1940 that he felt like Pontius Pilate in sentencing Arle to prison for non-registration. I had corresponded with them some years ago. Arle was away in a mountain helping build a house. There was a new brick medical center with nurse and beds and Doctor at hand under Quaker supervision. Each of several families here at Celo, <abbr class="postal">N.C.</abbr> owned their separate few acres and made their own living as they could.</p>
				<p>We drove on steadily, and at 3 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> on April first knocked on the door at Inspiration House, 1867 Kalarama Road, and under the efficient ministration of Bayard Rustin we were soon sleeping on the floor in the front room. We were among the first to arrive for the fast which had been postponed until midnight. I had many letters from friends feeling that I should not endanger my life by fasting. One of the first people I met was Emily Longstreth, wife of Walter Longstreth, Philadelphia lawyer and Quaker who had also refused to register for the draft in 1942. Both of the Longstreths refused to pay taxes for the war. Also John Baily, a young student feeling his way amidst the maze of World Government, back-to-the-land, pacifism, anarchism, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Lucile Lord, an <abbr class="initialism">FOR</abbr> member of a month, a pretty young girl, was also a first arrival. We had breakfast of scrambled eggs together in a restaurant. (Before starting a fast you should not eat heavy food.) Soon I met Woodland and Olga Kahler, super-vegetarian Vendantist friends of Scott Nearing. They asked about anarchism and I loaned them my article on Christian Anarchism in <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">The Ark</i> which had been published a few months before in San Francisco by a group of anarchists who were atheistic but had asked for my explanation of Christian Anarchism. The English pacifist Winifred Rawlins, with whom I had corresponded, was also there. <abbr class="name">J.B.</abbr> Fenner, an elderly Unitarian from Pittsburgh, roomed near me. He had quoted my “love, courage, and wisdom” in the bulletin of his church. All this anarchism was new to him and for an older man he did pretty well in trying to line it up with his idea of brotherhood in general. He stood up fairly well in picketing. Charles Huleatt of Tracy, <abbr class="postal">Calif.</abbr>, was a young man of much energy whose duty it was to awaken the sleepers in the morning. He had emerged from a religious environment and at this stage called himself an anarchist. Grace Rhoades was an efficient and pleasant lady with whom I had corresponded on the tax refusal question. She spent endless hours typing for the group. Margaret Dungan was an elderly, smiling lady who taught in a high-class girls school. She is also a tax refuser with whom I had corresponded. She was a good sport in picketing and stood up in fasting much better than the super-vegetarians whom I expect watched their loss of weight too morosely.</p>
				<p>Toward evening I was pleased to meet Dave Dellinger, with whom I had corresponded for years. He is the one man there with whom I feel most in common, anarchistic and not super-religious. He has character and I love him like a brother. His adopted son Howie Douglas slept near me and was the youngest of the group. Janet Lovett, wife of Bill Lovett of the first <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr> group to go to jail, is a sweet girl always on hand to do her share. She and Bent and Taddy Andresen came from the group at Glen Gardner, <abbr class="postal">N.J.</abbr> where Dave prints <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Alternative</i>. The Andresens are critical of religious ideas. Bent was on a long hunger strike in prison. I had known of Francis Hall but had never met him. He and his wife Pearl were religious, and quiet vegetarians; Francis tried to be fair but I felt he stressed religious observances too much.</p>
				<p>I had known <abbr class="name">A.J.</abbr> Muste, at times called the Number One Pacifist, in 1920 when he was a Trotskyite and again in 1942 in Boone, Iowa at a <abbr class="initialism">FOR</abbr> Conference when he and I each thought we would get five years for refusing to register the next week, I had written to him for five years suggesting that he refuse to pay taxes. He finally came around to that position and does very well. He is edging toward non-cooperation with government. I had only eaten a banana and an apple during the day. Shortly before the fast was to commence Francis and Pearl Hall and Dorothy and I went to a restaurant where we had supper.</p>
				<p>Dorothy had said that she would not picket during the week. She came here to pray. There was a long discussion about a 24-hour vigil before a candle⁠—purchased for $3 when one for $1.00 could be had from any Catholic church. It was finally decided that those should pray who liked, in a separate room. Each evening and each morning sessions were held to decide the action for the day. Leaflets were prepared and much discussion was held upon the exact wording. It was after midnight before the final form was mimeographed⁠—while Bayard Rustin entertained those present with lusty songs of prison, accompanied by his banjo. The good old ladies upstairs could not hear this or they would have gone home at once in dismay it is feared. And all of this activity on an empty stomach.</p>
				<p>On Sunday I went to mass with Dorothy, not because I believed in the mass, but because I believed in Dorothy. All these years Dorothy had not spoken to me much on theology. Once in a group she said to me never to join the Church because I loved her and the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>; it was the Church that had to be loved.</p>
				<p>She gave out leaflets at Catholic University, and the Kahlers and I went to the Catholic Cathedral with leaflets. Joe did not know whether he wanted to sleep all day or not, but when we got to the Cathedral he was already there. Gordon Zahn, Dick Leonard, and other <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>s and Catholics came to see Dorothy evenings. At one open meeting at night the Chairman asked Dorothy to explain about the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> movement. She said that she came here to pray and not to talk; that they should read the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> for information about the movement. Wednesday evening she was called back to New York by the serious illness of Charles O’Rourke, an old timer of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> staff. Burly Dave Mason came the next day in her place to represent the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>.</p>
				<p>Monday we picketed the White House. The group thought my sign saying I had paid no taxes for seven years was too radical, so I carried a sign saying that 75% of the income tax went for war. Others carried signs about The Gandhi Way, not War, being the best, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> We gave out leaflets and were not bothered. The paper next day had a picture of us. A Committee called on the White House to ask the President (who was in Florida) to rescind his approval of the <abbr class="initialism">H</abbr>-Bomb and hinted that he should resign rather than continue his murderous way. Tuesday a committee headed by the Kahler’s (<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Kahler is Russian) were greeted warmly at the Russian Embassy and were told that Russia would disarm if we would. A telegram about this was sent to Truman. An Appeal to the Russian People was handed to the Embassy and handed out on the streets.</p>
				<p>Wednesday was a day of rest and those who wished to visit did so. Several people felt weak and some had to take orange juice to keep up. I had fasted ten days in jail once and had been in a dark hole on bread and water for ten days in Atlanta, so the fast did not worry me. Voice of America and Tass were appealed to, to give the pacifist message. The Atomic Energy Commission was also visited, as was the National Educational Commission. Dave Dellinger had an Appeal to Workingmen which he wanted to give out at factories but because of the decision to visit Hugh Johnson’s Pentagon Building there was a try at an open air meeting instead and this failing we gave out literature on the street for several hours. Thursday morning, which was stormy, saw Fenner, Lucy Lord, Winifred Rawlins, Ann Rush, a young married woman from Tracy, <abbr class="postal">Calif.</abbr>, Ruth Hartshaugh, wife of a minister who tried to understand all this new anarchism, and myself handing out leaflets at a high school.</p>
				<p>I did not want to picket the tax man until I had enough <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s to hand out so I waited until Thursday evening when they came from New York. The group (Dorothy absent in New York) voted not to allow me to jeopardize them by putting out any of their basic leaflets when I picketed the tax man. So on Good Friday morning I went along with Edger Bell, a young Negro tax refuser from Washington, <abbr class="postal eoc">D.C.</abbr> It was quite windy but not very cold. We did not picket the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Treasury, where they keep the stolen money, but the Department of the Collector of Internal Revenue, where they do the stealing. A cop came out at once and told me I could not picket government property. I told him that I had already picketed the Post Office which was government property, in Phoenix, and had gotten away with it.</p>
				<p>“But this is <em>real</em> government property,” he replied.</p>
				<p>“There is a <em>real</em> Supreme Court around here someplace that says this is a free country and no permit is needed,” I said quickly.</p>
				<p>He replied that I would have to go up to 19th <abbr>St.</abbr> and get a permit to picket or he would pinch me. I told him that was a long distance to walk and if I went there and did not get a permit I would picket anyway, and then he could pinch me. I said he ought to call his boss and see what the law was, and then act accordingly. He smiled and said he would check up, and there was no further trouble. We gave out all of our papers and some slips about my nonpayment of taxes. Workers came out of the building and asked for copies. Only 15 people who passed refused to take our literature, so we considered our work a success.</p>
				<p>While I was picketing the tax man, the group had a discussion about tactics at the Pentagon Building. The nice old ladies would not take any part if there would be any arrests or trouble. And Wally Nelson, a courageous Negro from Cincinnati who picketed Ashland prison when Jim Otsuka was there, would not take part if pipsqueaking tactics were used. I was not present but I understand that <abbr class="name">A.J.</abbr> Muste weakened and allowed the old ladies to have their way. They had left for the Pentagon by the time I got back from my picketing. Most of the group stood against the wall in the corridor by Johnson’s office. He invited them to hold their prayer meeting in a certain room, out of sight, nearby. They evaded this by going outside of the building and sat on the steps during the Holy Hour of Good Friday, and nearly until dark. Later most of us agreed that the whole thing was a farce, for we should have either disobeyed the cops and had our civil disobedience or never have gone in the first place. Moral: too many old ladies.</p>
				<p>There were some late arrivals who fasted for only a day or two or who had fasted in their home towns but were unable to come to Washington the first of the week. One of these was Marshall Bush, a blind man from upstate New York, who had befriended <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>s during the war. Ralph Templin of Yellow Springs, Ohio, who had been a missionary in India and knew Gandhi, but who returned to this country rather than swear allegiance to the British Empire, was present. He had poise, and was a non-registrant and tax refuser. He and I handed out leaflets one afternoon. Horace Champney and Lloyd Danzeisen of the Peacemaker group in Yellow Springs also came. Bill Sutherland and Paula Waxman, and Juanita Nelson, wife of Wally, were active in getting our leaflets done on time. Katie Voorhies was an elderly, blind Negro woman from Tracy, <abbr class="postal">Calif.</abbr> who took money she had saved for burial and came here. Dave Mason was an old time wob. I went to mass with him mornings. Madge Burnham made fine precise posters. Walter Longstreth came down to greet his wife who had weakened somewhat physically while fasting. Elizabeth Haas, a young Quaker librarian from Baltimore who was fired because she refused to sign a loyalty oath, was a part-time faster also. I had met Louise Haliburton in Camp Mack, Indiana when I spoke at a Brethren Conference there in 1938. George Houser, non-registrant and tax refuser whom I had met in Cleveland in 1945 also came late. A young Quaker girl who works as a playground assistant brought her sleeping bag for the last three days.</p>
				<p>There was an attempt at the fast to evaluate what we were doing. Some felt that there was too much activity and not enough discussion. Others felt that there should be more prayer. Miss Dungan felt that if a person led a life of voluntary poverty he would miss the aesthetic values: music, beauty, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> I spoke up and boasted of the scenery and sunsets of desert Arizona which cost nothing and which I liked better than the canned music and organized beauty of the cities. I am reminded here of Dorothy’s saying that she liked the chirping of the desert thrush, the cooing of the mourning doves, and the varied song of the mocking bird at Desert Ranch just as much as a symphony.</p>
				<p>I was asked to give in detail my methods of propaganda. At another meeting on tax refusal Ralph Templin explained to some of the elderly ladies who refused to pay only part of their income taxes that the amount they did pay would be prorated for war, so the only way was to pay nothing at all. Bayard Rustin gave smart answers to questions from outsiders. I felt that this was too much of a varied group to do any one thing very well, although the meeting of so many kinds of people ought to be an education to all.</p>
				<p>I did not have a headache during the week and always was nearly last to bed and among the first to get up. I was in good physical condition from my hard work and good care of myself. One night I had supper with my old friend, Francis Gorgen of Baltimore, and it did not bother me a bit to sit by and watch him and his family eat. He drove me over to see my cousin Marie, whom I had not seen since we were youngsters in Ohio. Her father had been a Congressman in the old days of McKinley. I met Fred Libby of the National Council for the Prevention of War, with whom I had corresponded for years but whom I had not met before. The lady from Baltimore who had picked Rik and me up when we were hiking to our first Snake Dance, came over and took the Hopi out to supper. They brought home a pear and an orange for me to eat after my fast was broken.</p>
				<p>A few minutes after midnight on Saturday we all had orange juice and/or <abbr class="initialism">V</abbr>’juice. The Hopi had brought some piki bread which is like cornflakes and I gave some to each person. Bayard and Bill Sutherland and Bent sang some songs. The next morning <abbr class="name">A.J.</abbr> Muste read a poem and asked me to read a letter from Gandhi. None of us were the worse for the fast. We kidded Joe about sleeping half of the time, but this is his normal state and not due to fasting.</p>
				<p>The Hopi had met with all of the groups and the interpreter had translated the Chief’s message often to those interested. The Hopi fast and pray at home. To picket is not their way, but they were interested in their white brother pacifists. The newspapers took the Chief’s picture as a man who did not want help from the government, and it appeared all over the country.</p>
				<p>Joe and I went along with the Hopi to the Indian Bureau where we spent five hours interviewing officials. First we met D’Arcy McNickle, assistant Indian Commissioner. He is a sophisticated, one-twenty-fourth or some such fraction, Flatfoot or Flathead Indian who had just written a book, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">They Came Here First</i>, lauding all Indians who are government stooges. He studiously insulted the Hopi interpreter by calling him by his English name instead of his Indian name. The Chief spoke of the Hopi way of life, how the government employees of the Hopi spoke only for themselves and had long ago left the true Hopi way. He told of meetings that the Indian Agent had held and what went on at these meetings. While one Hopi was translating the English to Dan, McNickle looked at the recorded minutes of the meeting and whispered to me that the old man was honestly reporting what went on and had a wonderful memory, for he did not make one mistake. McNickle asked Dan why, if he wore a white man’s coat and rode in a white man’s car he did not support the white man’s schools and way of life. Dan drew himself up proudly and replied:</p>
				<p>“I have heard these words from traitor Hopi but I never expected to hear them from you.” McNickle blushed and hid his face behind his hands in shame.</p>
				<p>In the afternoon we met with Commissioner Nichols who was soon to be replaced by Dillon Myer. He was a pleasant fellow. He asked Dan how he liked the roads and Dan replied that they were good enough for the Hopi but not good enough for the white man to rush around and go nowhere fast and disturb the peaceful Hopi. He asked about the schools and Dan said he did not send his children to government schools for only devil worship was taught there. He asked about water and Dan replied that the government drilled a well right on the edge of the land he used and on the other side were Navajo. He did not use this well for he knew that in time the Navajo would push over and, with the aid of the government, would get the rest of his land. Dan said that there was testing for oil on Hopi land. Nichols replied that no oil testing could take place without his consent. Dan spoke up:</p>
				<p>“You are not there and do not know whether the Indian Agent is in collusion with the oil company or not.”</p>
				<p>Nichols asked why the Hopi boys did not register for the draft and get exemption as conscientious objectors. The interpreter replied that the Hopi were traditional pacifists and would have nothing to do with putting down their names for war, that promises made by the government were not kept anyhow. The Christian Hopi and the government-employee Hopi went to war, but not the real Hopi. Dan spoke of the stone tablets which have the boundary of the Hopi land; that soon the white brother of the Hopi would come with the replica of this stone and the world would be purified by fire in World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> where all who were not true to their ideals would be destroyed. The real Hopi could therefore not make compromise with the oppressor.</p>
				<p>While this conversation was being translated, the government lawyer John Jay, who was sitting next to me asked: “Did you read that good article on the Hopi in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Catholic Worker</i>?” “I wrote it,” I answered. Jack Durham, publicity man for the Bureau, was also present and smiled approvingly when the interpreter translated Dan’s forthright message. As we got up to leave I gave all those present copies of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> with my article on the Hopi.</p>
				<p>Nichols put his arm around Dan and said:</p>
				<p>“The way of Jesus, Gandhi, and the Hopi is right. I think I am an anarchist myself. This whole mixed up world doesn’t make sense.”</p>
				<p>He was on his way out of the Indian Service so I suppose could afford to speak the truth.</p>
				<p>Another day we had a meeting for an hour and a half with Judge Witt of the Court of Land Claims, a stern looking old man. He explained that the Hopi had one more year to file a claim for the land which they felt the government had taken from them and given to the Navajo. He advised them to get a lawyer, Dan gave the regular Hopi sermon at length, saying that they did not want money for the stolen land; they were here to ask the White man to repent of his evil ways. The judge wiped his eyes again and again and with great feeling said:</p>
				<p>“I thank you for the best sermon I have ever heard. I congratulate you on your noble faith and religion. I appreciate your visit and wish you well.”</p>
				<p>We spent a few minutes with Congressman Toby Morris, typical demagogue and head of the committee on the Navajo-Hopi Bill. He said he did not know how the name of the Hopi got in the bill. While I was picketing the tax man the Hopi interviewed Senator Johnson of Colorado. He had not known about the real Hopi and had the idea that all Indians, like most white men, had their hands out for something from the government.</p>
				<p>Tuesday morning after Easter we spent several hours with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Nash, Secretary to David Niles of the President’s staff. He knew a real Hopi from a government Hopi and tried to say that Truman was a very religious man who would not allow anything to be done to harm the Hopi without first letting them have something to say about it. While the interpreter was translating, I whispered to him that there was a great difference between Dan and the rice-Christian Hopi. He nodded approvingly toward Dan.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Mott Street</h3>
				<p>After selling <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s at the Cathedral I left around noon with Bill and Paula Sutherland and Bent Andresen, for New York. Bill is dark skinned and the waitress where we stopped for some ice cream said that Negroes were not served here but “Egyptians were <abbr class="initialism">o.k.</abbr>,” looking at Bill. He had been called many names but never an Egyptian.</p>
				<p>I had visited Mott <abbr>St.</abbr>, the home of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, for a few hours in 1938 and 1939 but did not remember just whom I had met. I had corresponded with Bob Ludlow, one of the editors of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, for several years and was anxious to meet him. It was about 9 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> when I walked into the kitchen and introduced myself. Several there know of my articles and greeted me kindly. Bob was not in just then. I was soon greeted by Dorothy, and Eleanor and Marge, in the kitchen where the latter lived with her children. Dorothy felt that scrambled eggs and coffee would be just the thing for one who had fasted for a week and I agreed vociferously. O’Rourke, who had been ill, was better, but Tom Sullivan was not to be seen as he was suffering from a breaking-out caused by the backfire of penicillin. I met Bob for a short time around midnight and took to him like a brother, although he was very quiet and difficult to get acquainted with. He is the first anarchist, other than Peter and Dorothy, whom I had known of around the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and we had much in common.</p>
				<p>I went to the top floor and visited with two men who asked questions for a long time. One of them was the head cook downstairs. I did not hear the clock strike 3 and 5 so I must have slept two hours.</p>
				<p>I was wondering what spiritual result there would be for me in this fast. I had been busy with propaganda and had met many fine people, but I felt that was not enough. When I awoke I had the feeling that I ought to get a <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> house started in Phoenix as soon as possible. I had to find a Catholic to run it and as yet I had not found any to help me sell <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s on the streets. When Dorothy met with the anarchists in Phoenix she had mentioned that “Vanzetti House” would be the name of the house when it was started. I mentioned this to some people later and they thought a <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> house should only be named after a regular Church saint. I replied that Vanzetti had been born a Catholic in Italy and had only left the Church because big churchmen had stood with the big landlords against the poor, that his sister who was a practising Catholic came from Italy to see him before he was executed, that his last words were worthy of a saint: “I want to forgive those who are doing this to me.” I had never met him but when my wife and I were hiking we met <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sacco and Dante and the baby several times at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jack’s. We went with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sacco when she saw her husband and we nodded to him and clasped our hands as if shaking his hands, which we were not allowed to touch. I remember how I quit work and my wife and I cried all day on <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 23, 1927 when Sacco and Vanzetti were executed. For years I had addressed a memorial meeting on <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 23 until in 1942 when I had such a meeting in Denver and but one person attended, I ceased. <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Boston</i> by Upton Sinclair is a novel based on this case and should be a part of the required reading for all young people.</p>
				<p>I went down to the kitchen and had a bowl of coffee which was handed to me by a well dressed, smiling, elderly man. Later Dorothy told me he was the Shy Apostle written about in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> by John McKeon. I accompanied Dorothy to the small Italian church. Only two or three others were there. The walls were covered with life-size murals of my favorite saint, Francis of Assisi. Before this I had always sat still in church but today I felt like kneeling when Dorothy did. The religious meetings at the Fast were boring to me. I felt more uplifted by contact with the Hopi. Ever since I had been released from Atlanta prison in 1919 I had believed in enough orthodox dogma⁠—Father, Son, Holy Ghost, Immaculate Conception, all the miracles, the Resurrection and Ascension⁠—but I did not see any connection between any church and the Sermon on the Mount, and least of all was I attracted to the Catholic church. Mostly because of Franco I suppose. If I had known any Protestant who was an anarchist and a pacifist I would have gone to church with him. Dorothy was the only religious person I knew who had that greatest of virtues: courage. So I was glad to kneel beside her.</p>
				<p>Returning to Mott street I saw Bob opening a huge bundle of letters that had accumulated over Sunday. Dorothy asked me to answer a request about anarchism from some Quakers. I was glad to meet Jack English when he came in, and was sorry to miss Irene Naughton who was on a speaking tour to Nova Scotia. Dorothy asked me to entertain seminarians who came in while she was hunting for a new headquarters for the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, which was being evicted because the house was sold.</p>
				<p>I spoke to <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Deacy of <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s on the phone. He had written in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. As I knew Roger Baldwin was not in town I told Bob the only two people I wanted to meet just then were Jim Peck and Sandy Katz. I spoke to Jim on the phone but he could not come down. I met Sandy that evening. He was a very intelligent Jewish young man who had done time twice for refusing to register and who also refused to pay taxes. He was an atheist anarchist, much interested in Freud; one of the few regular anarchists friendly to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. The columnist Robert Ruark had described Sandy as a Greenwich Village tough who had long hair, dressed sloppily, wore a green turtleneck sweater. Sandy said he had not been in the Village in five years, never wore a turtleneck sweater, and above all, any green sweater in his life. For dinner we had good soup and plenty of bread. Baked potato for supper and some chocolate pudding. Nothing fancy. I asked Dorothy who it was that served the food. She said she didn’t know; everybody helps; that they come and go and no one asks any questions. This was much different from the Salvation Army places I had stayed when I hiked in 1945 where you had to “sing for your supper.” Near the door of the office was a pile of shoes and men came in often to see if they could find any that fit them. One drunk came in singing “Dorothy is a red,” but after half an hour when no one disputed his song he left. Another drunk muttered around for hours after we said compline. I left around midnight on the bus for Washington to meet the Hopi and Joe. I had not slept five hours straight sleep since I had left Phoenix yet I was not sleepy when I got into Washington.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Homeward</h3>
				<p>We headed toward Cincinnati where I was to meet my mother at my brother Frank’s home. Around midnight we went into a Greek restaurant in Clarksburg, <abbr class="postal eoc">W. Va.</abbr> Each of the four Greek brothers who ran the place was more decrepit and suave than the other. A person eats thousands of meals yet very few are remembered. This huge Spanish omelette with homemade bread and my favorite pie, raisin, was a treat for $1.05. My mother looked better than when I had seen her in 1945. My niece Patsy I had seen when an infant when I had spoken in churches in Cincinnati. She now attended parochial school, her mother Rose being Catholic. She was excited to meet real Indians and when Dan took a belt from his pocket and gave it to her she was overjoyed. We drove through Indianapolis where Joe had formerly run a fruit stand. It was ten <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> when we stopped in Terra Haute. I phoned Theodore Debs, brother of Eugene Debs, but no one answered the phone. My wife and I had visited there twice. He must be a very old man by this time.</p>
				<p>In Albuquerque we were welcomed by <abbr>Msgr.</abbr> Garcia who had an apartment for just such tramps. By this time our funds were low so I asked my good Lutheran friend, <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Soker for $10. After we reached Gallup we went near Window Rock and the Hopi pointed out the original boundary of the Hopi land before the government commenced stealing it. As we came to <abbr>St.</abbr> Michael’s Mission in the Navajo country we stopped. I knocked on the door and Father Gail answered. I gave him a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, and his eyes brightened as he spoke of meeting Peter and Dorothy in Detroit years ago. I told him of our trip to Washington. He said that the Indian Bureau was a mess, likely because more recently under Gollier they did not favor missionaries. He showed us the beautiful small chapel, whose altar had been hand-carved by Indians⁠—and all around were Navajo rugs. Joe and I knelt and said our own kind of prayers of thankfulness for a safe and pleasant journey. Father Gail said they could do nothing with the Hopi. We told him that the Hopi were true pacifists and anarchists like the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> and had nothing to learn from priests who took the part of the government against the Indian and supported war and the capitalist system. He took it in good spirit.</p>
				<p>We stopped in New Oraibi, and proceeded on to Hotevilla to take Dan home. He reported to his family in Hopi language about the trip and introduced us. One girl was asleep on the floor and a beautiful girl of 18 was sitting by the stove. I sat beside Dan’s brother. The Hopi introduced us to Paul who lived nearby and who, like us, had been in jail as a <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>. His wife sat on sheepskins on the floor. She showed us a smiling baby girl born the day before⁠—without government aid. Two small boys played around. I do not feel capable of describing the beauty of Hopiland. My good friend Bert Fireman, columnist on the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Phoenix Gazette</i> and commentator on the Ford Hour in his <i epub:type="se:name:broadcast">Arizona Crossroads</i> program, has permitted me to quote from a recent broadcast where he tells of Dan’s father Yukeoma.</p>
				<p>I quote:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Come, let us visit one of the most inaccessible and colorful of all Arizona Crossroads, the three-fingered mesa land of Northern Arizona, famous as the home of the peaceful Hopi Indians. This is the land of romantic, grotesque Kachina dolls; the home of a people so gentle they sometimes have been called the Quakers of the American Indians. This is a dry land, where nature has provided the people it loves with multicolored corn that will germinate a foot beneath the dry desert surface. This is a land where the villages are built atop precipitous mesas, where water is scarce and beautiful vistas are abundant, where men are the weavers and dancers and where every community is a separate democracy unto itself. This is the home of our nation’s most sensational ceremonial⁠—the Hopi Snake Danc: a nine-day ceremonial for rain that is culminated with the Hopi dancing with live rattlesnakes in their mouths.</p>
					<p>This is Hopiland: beautiful, impoverished, deeply reverent, democratic and pagan⁠—the last outpost resisting Christianity in our country. Yet, strangely, until recently it was absolutely free of the crime and drunkenness and debauchery that the Christian world has had to endure along with the thing we call civilization. This is a land of uninhibited, primitive beauty; of virtue and contentment despite privation and poverty. This is a last frontier of America⁠—this Arizona Crossroads we call Hopiland.</p>
					<p>This was the home of one of the most fascinating men who ever visited the city that is recognized the world over as the capital of progress⁠—Washington, <abbr class="postal eoc">D.C.</abbr> In 1911, standing before ponderous President William Howard Taft, Yukeoma eloquently recited a philosophy of passive resistance that 30 years later was to make another gnome-like brown man one of the most controversial yet respected men of peace in the modern world.</p>
					<p>They came from opposite ends of the world. One was highly educated, the other was ignorant of his nation’s language; one was poor by heritage, the other poor by choice. Yet Yukeoma, the Hopi Indian from Arizona, and Mahatma Gandhi, the wizened saint of India’s fight for freedom, beneath their brown skins had the same fervent love for the dignity and honor of man as an individual, for the simple old way of doing things, and both had hatred only for compulsion and violence.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>My Hopi Friend had told me when we came home that Yukeoma had told Dan many years ago that when he was an old man he would make a trip to Washington by the same route that he had made in 1911 but he would not see the President. We had planned to go by way of Meridian <abbr class="postal">Miss.</abbr> but the storms had persuaded us to go by way of Mobile and Atlanta and this was the route taken by Yukeoma⁠—and we did not see the President, for he was in Florida.</p>
				<p>Joe and I came through Flagstaff and left <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s with Father Albey whom I had met before. We came down beautiful Oak Creek Canyon zigzagging up the mountain side through Jerome, the mining town built literally on a mountainside. We stopped and said prayers at <abbr>St.</abbr> Joseph’s Shrine at Yarnell in gratitude for the 6,000 mile trip without even a flat-tire. Opening my mail I found two five dollar bills from anarchist friends who liked my anti-war stand; thus my debt to <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Soker was paid, and the trip was ended without a deficit. The Old Pioneer had worked an hour a day in the garden. Mulberries were ripe; pomegranate blossoms enlivened the place. The desert flowers of Arizona still seemed to me better than the lush green of the north and east.</p>
				<p>My idea of God in May of 1950 is described in a letter to Dorothy: “God is a power-line, and a person can pray and do anything he wishes but unless he connects with this power line he is not connected up. It is all talk. If the average person tries to ‘connect up’ without using a transformer he is likely to get shocked or killed (maybe that is what happened to me in solitary, as <abbr>Msgr.</abbr> Hillenbrand so wittily said). Churches should be these transformers to do the ‘connecting’ but they weaken the current until it hardly means a thing.”</p>
				<p>Around this time I worked at very hard work for two days with a sledge hammer and came home too tired to eat. I slept for eleven hours and ate three oranges for breakfast, worked hard all day and was still tired and went to bed without supper for twelve hours and woke up feeling fine. When cats and dogs are sick they don’t eat, or they nibble at grass to make them vomit.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>World Federalists</h3>
				<p>Two years before, I had been at a World Federalist meeting at the <abbr class="initialism">YWCA</abbr>, sponsored by the pseudo-liberal Unitarian minister. The son of the Mormon Chief Justice in Arizona spoke and the minister sought to convince the audience that unless they converted the city to World Federalism at once there was little use in living. (He soon quit the ministry and has not been heard of since.) Now in May of 1950 the new Unitarian minister called for a meeting where the President of the United World Federalists, Alan Cranston, would speak. I was invited to be present.</p>
				<p>Cranston said that 75% of our taxes went for war. That without law there could not be justice, and without justice there could be no peace. That we had to have a government to prevent crime. Although he was a newspaper man he talked like a lawyer. He said we had to have a live ideal to defeat the Communist ideal. He was against disarmament.</p>
                                <p>When the time for questions and remarks came, I said that I was one of those who did not pay that tax for war that he was talking about. That these World Federalists spoke fine words but that their action tomorrow would be just like that of yesterday: that they would all go on paying taxes for the bomb which would kill them one of these days. That they would not gain their World Federalism until they had a majority which was so far away there was no use talking about it. That we Christian Anarchists could practice our ideal right now without waiting on anyone else. That if they were going to overcome the Communists they would have to have an ideal at least as persuasive as the Communists, and not a twopenny secondhand ideal that demands little and gives less.</p>
				<p>Cranston replied: “The trouble is that there is too much anarchy now and not enough government. We all know that anarchism is the ideal toward which society reaches, but we have to have World Federalism first.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Tax Garnishee</h3>
				<p>On June 7th, 1950 I was working for James Hussey, the farmer four miles down the road who is a reserve army captain and for whom I have worked by the day. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schumacher of the Internal Revenue office asked him how much I had coming and as I had started late that morning I had $5 coming. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schumacher requested this to be paid on my taxes and wanted to know if I would work for James the next day. James did not know. The tax sleuth wanted him to phone and then he could come out and get my wages. James answered “uh-huh” and came over later and told me about it, saying that I did not believe in paying taxes and he did, so this was out of his pocket; that in the future he would cooperate with me instead of with the tax man.</p>
				<p>The Old Pioneer was in the hospital and the tax man had called on him desiring to know if I had any money coming. I had $12 coming, which had been paid to me by Lin Orme <abbr>Jr.</abbr>, neither of us knowing that the tax man was headed this way. From that time on I notified my employers that if they paid the tax man any of my wages I would not work for them.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schumacher went to each of my employers trying to sell them the idea that if they cooperated with me they were not patriotic and were as bad as I was. But they had been reading the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> long enough to know what it was all about, and besides nobody likes a tax man. So I was either paid in advance, or at night when I finished, or trusted to luck that the tax man did not know where I was working on any certain day. Generally I did not know myself until I phoned to see which farmer wanted me that day. I had told <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schumacher that I would not lie to him but it was his business to find out where I was working. I had given him the names of my employers and my address and I was not hiding. The idea was that I would not pay any income tax.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Irrigating</h3>
				<p>The water gurgles in the ditch past my cabin all during the night. I hear the soft whistle and song of the Mexican national as he skillfully guides the water evenly by the quarter-mile-long rows of cantaloupes. Now it is morning and the shift changes. The Big Company has the straightest, cleanest rows, and their ground is well worked. There is a distraint against my wages now so I can’t work for the Big Company anymore. I do not know much about irrigation, but in the eight years that I have been working in this Southwest I have learned the hard way how not to do certain things. Unless one understands the problem of water in this country, all other information amounts to very little. As I write these pages I am waiting for James to come to get me to irrigate his alfalfa tonight. This type of irrigating is fairly easy. The lands are thirty to forty feet wide and the ports do not have to be dug open and filled in again with the shovel, but are of cement with a tin which is inserted in a groove. We generally run three lands at once. The water comes in supply ditches, called laterals, down the valley north and south on each crossroad, and each road is numbered. I live on lateral 20. As the water comes across the head of the field the up-to-date farmer has a concrete dam, with a huge tin to open and close it, about four to a quarter mile. Otherwise a canvass tarpaulin (called “tarp”) is slanted on poles which rest on a beam across the ditch, and this makes the dam. Two skillful irrigators can insert a tarp in running water five feet deep and form a perfect dam.</p>
				<p>Two of the farmers for whom I irrigate had a man who slept all night and did not change the lands of water. As the ports are opened and the water rushes into the lands, it goes at a different rate of flow, depending upon the distance from the immediate dam nearby, obstruction of sticks or weeds, or lay of the land. The thing to remember in this Southwest is that the lay of the land is southwest. Walking south to the bus along the lateral, which to the eye would seem to be nearly level, one notices four or more drops, or cascades, during the mile. The waste water from the irrigated fields flows into these ditches and is used again and again further down the line.</p>
				<p>The chief worry of an irrigator is that rodent vegetarian who fills canal and ditch banks with holes. When you figure on so much water in one place, a great portion of it is apt to be following the serpentine burrowings of Brother Gopher, whose pouches outside his cheeks must literally carry tons of dirt during his lifetime. At least he is “riding high” in the Western country, as did Noah’s Ark, built of gopher wood.</p>
				<p>Irrigating alfalfa is easy work compared to running the water over bare land, for unless you are used to the field you cannot know just where to put the checks so that all of the land will get wet. I remember irrigating such land for a jack-Mormon (backsliding Mormon) and right even with the flow of water a thousand winged blackbirds would be hopping from dry clod to dry clod, gobbling up the insects which were driven from their sequestered domiciles by the oncoming water.</p>
				<p>Walking down the lateral early one Sunday morning, to get the bus to town to sell <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s in front of churches, I saw a great flock of these same birds roosting and gaily chirping on the backs of the sheep which were grazing on lettuce culls. How they kept from entangling their feet in the wool I do not know, but I never saw one that seemed to have any interference on that account. Maybe this is the way they kept their toes warm early in the frosty morning.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Old Pioneer</h3>
				<p>The Old Pioneer is not a radical in the accepted sense. He was on the draft board in World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> and supported this last war. He is an old time Jeffersonian Democrat who wants no subsidies from any government. Like draws like, and God brings together those who sincerely and without counting the cost seek to follow the Truth. If I had asked people where there was a radical farmer for whom I could work I might have been sent to some New Dealer who would certainly not be in sympathy with my anarchism. As it was, I trusted in God and ended up here in the one place in the Valley where there was a farmer of character who chased numerous tax men, the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr>, an Army Intelligence man, and a Postal Inspector. I offered to leave as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Orme was sick in the hospital with ulcers at times and I felt this nibbling at me by the law would aggravate his illness. “Stay here and fight them,” he said.</p>
				<p>In the old days before dams and water districts, the Indians had irrigation canals. Some of these are modernized and used today by the whites. Land was cheap then but much of it was gobbled up by bankers.</p>
                                <p>The users of water had banded themselves together in a sort of semi-cooperative Water Users’ Association. Soon these bogus farmers and absentee and corporate retainers of wealth had control. The ordinary rancher was at the mercy of non-working theorists, with expensive and impractical plans, who knew little of the procedure of farming and whose chore was to make a living by parasitical living only. At that time the Old Pioneer was in his prime and went from schoolhouse to schoolhouse, evenings, making a fight against these corporate interests. The press jeered at his “one-man revolution.” Certain big interests tried to bribe him by giving him a nominal job, but he refused to consider it and cleverly turned their trickery against them. He kept on until he was elected president of the Water Users and fought the good fight there for fourteen years.</p>
                                <p>In the old days all water gates were locked, and the <i lang="es">zanjero</i>, or “sankerra” as we Anglos pronounce it, who was the ditch rider, had to carry an enormous bunch of keys. The Old Pioneer ordered the gates to be left unlocked, for only a few would steal water and when they were caught then the gates could be locked. The plan worked. Strange tales are told of supposedly pious men who were water thieves. In those days too a <i lang="es">zanjero</i> would often let it be known that the best way to be sure of water when you wanted it was to give him a calf, sheep, or a bag of wheat, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> The old Pioneer finally weeded these dishonest fellows out. Feather bedding was not born with the diesel for in the old days here when a crew of Yaqui Indians went out to clean the laterals of weeds and Johnson grass, the custom was to have a foreman, a timekeeper, a truck-driver, and a water boy. The Old Pioneer changed all this. One man could drive the truck, keep the time, and be foreman. Ice was furnished and each Yaqui had a rest during the day when he was water boy for his fellows. The Yaqui lived in the desert east of Phoenix. The Old Pioneer built them modern cement-block houses and a Catholic church. He reopened dozens of cases for Yaqui, who had previously been injured and had signed off any demands for a pittance. They received a liberal settlement from him. He also invested a lot of money in a shop where tools were to be sharpened and kept in shape, thus appealing to the peasant-instinct of the Yaqui for pride in their work. At times when I meet strangers in the valley and they ask me where I live and what I do, I tell them where I am. Sometimes they say, “That bald-headed old <abbr class="initialism eoc">s.o.b.</abbr>” When I mention this to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Orme he laughs and says “That must have been one of the fellows who were sitting doing nothing with their feet on the desk when I went around the first day, and I made them go to work.”</p>
				<p>The Old Pioneer instituted another idea based on sound psychology, although he went only to the 5th grade with a little extra study later in mathematics. He had an open office with benches lined up full of people waiting to complain to him. There was no putting people off; he attended to the thing right there. People soon got to know that he was on the square, and in time this cut down complaints. No stuffed-shirt, false dignity with him.</p>
				<p>The best stories of his fourteen years as head of the Parole Board in the State of Arizona cannot be told. I am sure I can say without being contradicted by any students of Arizona history that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Orme is one of the very few men, among Governors, Justices of the Supreme Court, Sheriffs, and the Police who could not be bought and who could not be scared. Despite his natural integrity, there is always the chance that he had to learn how and what to do. Thus when he was first head of the Parole Board the Governor asked him to approve the pardon of a certain forger. The Old Pioneer did so and within a few days this parolee had passed a false check on the Governor himself. From that time on the Old Pioneer listened to no outsiders. He did approve paroles for men who made good. Some of them to this day write to him from distant places. But he had a hard heart toward bankers and felt they had an education and should do their time.</p>
				<p>One Mexican who had been fired from the ranch for putting stones in his cotton sack to increase the weight later went to prison for some other theft and came up for parole. He said to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Orme, “You know me.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Orme answered, “I sure do. The answer is ‘no.’ ” When I am writing my articles or my tax statements I give them to him to read, not as a censor, but for correction as to fact or emphasis. Often he says: “Put more Gandhi and Jesus into it.”</p>
				<p>There was a time, when he was head of the Parole Board, that a man was supposed to be hung for an especially cleverly-planned murder. This man belonged to a certain religion, and great pressure came to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Orme from the people of this religion who said: “A ⸻ has never been hanged in Arizona.” The Old Pioneer had definite proof, other than court evidence, from one who saw this murder, so his answer was, “A ⸻ is sure enough going to hang this time.” And he did.</p>
				<p>At another time several people were caught in a murder, tried, and sentenced. All officials who had anything to do with it except <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Orme and the Sheriff had agreed to allow these criminals out on high bail, with the understanding that they would skip bail and the county would be that much richer. This was in the depression when money was hard to get. The bad bargain fell through and the men hung. He was stern, and believed in the rod and in an eye for an eye, but he was just, and never defrauded or underpaid his help, as others did who talked religion. Under another Governor he was offered another job, and was asked to sign his resignation from the Parole Board before accepting the job. “To hell with you and your job,” was his answer. He would do what was right and make promises to no one. If he had once accepted the ethics of the Sermon on the Mount he would have had the courage to practice them; there would be no halfway business with him.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Los Angeles Unlimited</h3>
				<p>With the increasing population in Arizona due to the fine climate and the wiles of real estate men and Chambers of Commerce, there is such a demand for water that the water level is constantly dropping. Last year many in this vicinity had to spend from $1,500 to $2,500 for drilling new wells for water for house use, or for deepening old ones. If a farmer cannot afford to drill a new well this is only one more farm to be leased to the Big Company whose giant wells have already in part caused this water shortage. Most of the water used in irrigation here does not come from natural rainfall and snows but from scattered wells owned by the Association. This water has a salty content, and its use for irrigation, along with commercial fertilizers, causes the land to become alkali, so that in the last two years 160,000 acres out of the 720,000 acres under cultivation in the Valley has gone back to desert. New land is being opened up constantly of course. Land has A, B, or C, water rights and the greenhorn had better be sure that his land has schedule A or his dreams of making the desert bloom like the rose will not materialize.</p>
				<p>The freehanded Westerner of Arizona was no match for the city slickers in Los Angeles Unlimited years ago when the Water Compact was made. Arizona is on the high side of the Colorado River and can only gasp for water while the Babylon of Los Angeles and California cheerfully and brazenly siphons and wastes millions of gallons of water away. The Central Arizona Project now up in Congress would give to Arizona what is legally allowed under the Compact, but which was previously prohibited because of the cost of pumping or channelling it. It will finally cost nearly a billion dollars, would have to be paid for by the federal government, and would only supplement the water already needed by existing water users. With the trend of corporate farming as it is and the certainty that real estate men would sell more land at inflated price to suckers, the present day evils would only be increased. The rancher whose land is under a lien to a profligate government will soon be a peon as were the helots of Egypt.</p>
				<p>This brings to mind the whole question of corporate farming. The Bank of America octopus in California backs the Grapes of Wrath hegemony of that state and the idea has come to this Last Frontier of the country. As I have stated before in these pages it is a vicious circle: people come here for their health and find little work to do. The chief industry is the Reynolds Aluminum Plant employing 1,500 men. Reynolds, with his millions, was too poor to build a plant so “went on relief” and got a war plant from the government at a fifth of its cost. Other migrants come from the south and even a few from California. There are the native Spanish and Mexicans who have more recently come over. There is not enough for all at any time, except for a very few rushed months in cotton and cantaloupes. The well paid jobs are in the packing shed, and the Union books are generally closed. The fields are not organized. Trucks come to the slave market at 2nd and Jefferson Streets around dawn to get workers. At times they pick only those whom they have known previously. Some trucks are run by Big Companies; others by private contractors. Some take only Mexicans, others only Negroes, others take mixed groups. Trucks load up at Tolleson, Glendale, and other small towns too.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Field Work</h3>
				<p>When work is done by contract, that is so much a row for thinning lettuce, chopping cotton, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, the tendency is for the worker to do a poor job and earn as much as possible. In a big field no boss can see everything. If the pay is sixty or seventy cents an hour or more the tendency is to loaf and kill time. Many Big Companies have solved this by importing Mexican nationals and having them live, like slaves of old, on the ranch. Indians are also brought from the reservation, paid unbelievably low wages, and cheated in the company stores. The nationals have generally not learned to soldier on the job like the native of the valley, and they are sure to be depended upon until they get “spoiled.”</p>
				<p>The leveling and working of the land requires expensive machinery which the small rancher cannot always have at hand. Consequently he has to await his turn for custom tillage, work his ground improperly, or get his crop in too late. In marketing produce the Big Companies set the pace and the little fellow is often out in the cold.</p>
				<p>As long as so many people live in the cities there will be this unnatural plan, with thousands of migrant workers scurrying here and there to provide the labor needed to harvest the crops of the Big Companies. Too many city workers and farm workers want a pay check but no responsibility. They have adopted the something-for-nothing philosophy being encouraged by demagogues. They may make good pay but it is soon spent for canned goods. A few hours of work a week in a garden would provide better and cheaper food. Even this is more responsibility than many care to take. The tavern, bingo, radio, movie, dog race, ball game, <abbr>etc.</abbr> calls.</p>
			</section>
			<hr/>
			<p>“Doing it the hard way, eh?” spoke the Mexican who was driving the huge caterpillar disc in the field next to the 75 by 75 foot garden which the Old Pioneer and I share, and which I was spading.</p>
			<p>“Yes, but I eat from this garden every day of the year and don’t plow under my crop like you folks do,” I replied.</p>
			<p>True, the disc was ten thousand times more efficient than my primitive method, but for what? Lettuce and melons are not raised to be eaten but only for the profit to be made. If the price drops the crop is plowed under or sheep are turned in on the field. Three years ago my Molokon neighbor received $5,000 for the cabbage on his 20 acres. Next year he put in 40 acres and did not sell a head.</p>
			<p>This capitalist system does not make sense. There is no answer to the problem of labor and of agriculture under this set-up. Small organic communes, or family homesteads, or groups where a diversity of crops are raised may be established some day, when capitalism dies after World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. It is more likely⁠—but not necessarily more likeable⁠—that a Communist dictatorship will intensify all the evils of large scale corporate farming, with their forced, so-called communal farms. All the more reason why Catholic Workers and other decentralists of spiritual emphasis should establish themselves on the land now.</p>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>My first fast and picketing</h3>
				<p>Before the Korean War I had told my tax man, a Catholic who thought the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> was a Communist paper, that I was going to picket his office on <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 6th.⁠—the anniversary of the bombing of Hiroshima in 1945. When Dave Dellinger and others commenced their two week fast in Glen Gardner, <abbr class="postal">N.J.</abbr>, against the sending of troops to Korea, I wrote to him that although I was unsympathetic with his World Citizen emphasis, I would fast and picket for five days commencing <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 7th, from my anti-tax Christian Anarchist point of view. The 6th came on a Sunday so there was no use picketing then.</p>
				<p>According to the Gandhian technique of goodwill and frankness I wrote to the City Manager and to my tax man, telling them of my extended plans; also to the chief of police asking for a permit and telling him if he did not give me one I would picket anyway. I also wrote 94 individual letters to every priest, preacher, Mormon leader, Jehovah Witness leader, <abbr>etc.</abbr> in Phoenix telling them of my fast, quoting, “The fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much.” I knew what my <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> priest friends thought about it, but from all these letters I received only one answer, from a Methodist minister praising my stand. It happened that his church was not far from <abbr>St.</abbr> Matthew’s where I was selling <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s the next Sunday so I went down to his service between masses. In this church there is “open communion” which means that anyone, whether a Methodist or not, could take communion. They have communion about four times a year I think. On an impulse of sympathy with this preacher who had answered my letter I took communion, telling him later that the reason I had was because of his sympathy with my pacifism. I had only taken communion before when I was a Baptist⁠—and there a goblet was passed around and everyone took a sip.</p>
				<p>About two weeks before my fast I was visiting an enthusiastic young Catholic couple on a Sunday afternoon and discussing the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> movement. A knock came to the door and a young man inquired for me. My host, knowing the ways of the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr>, asked the young man why he wanted to see me. He replied that he had read the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> in Detroit and had come down to visit me. This was the right word to say to get into that house, so in he came. His name was Jack Yaker, a Jewish veteran who had graduated from Ann Arbor and had somehow skipped the agony of Socialist and Communist activity and had at once become an anarchist. He had read the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> in the Labadie Collection at the <abbr>U.</abbr> of Michigan, and the anarchist curator of this excellent library of radical thought had suggested that before he go any further in radical thought or commercial pursuits he should look me up in Arizona. He quit his job and hiked down here in four days. Inquiring as to the location of my postal address he was told that it was west of town. Getting into a bus headed westward he was asked by the driver where he wanted to go. Noticing a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> by the driver’s wheel he said that he wanted to get off where that Hennacy was who wrote in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, someplace west of town. The driver replied that this bus went north within a few blocks and not west but that I had been on this bus on the last trip and had handed him this <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and he knew where I got off and would let Jack off at the same stop. This was the first time I had ridden on this bus on a Sunday and the first time I had met this driver, so my habit of giving <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s to bus drivers bore fruit.</p>
				<p>Jack had the regular anarchist criticism of society, but as with most anarchists he did not have the positive ideas with which to build toward the new society. When we discussed my plans for the fast he offered to be at hand and give me a drink of distilled water every half hour or so. By the time of my fast he had met my Catholic pacifist and anarchist friends here and read old copies of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> so that he understood the mood in which a fast should be conducted.</p>
				<p>Rik and Ginny and I had spent hours getting a leaflet out which was headed:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<h4>The One Man Revolution</h4>
					<p>Why do you, a sensible person, now believe that war and the <abbr class="initialism">A</abbr>-Bomb are necessary?</p>
					<p>Why are poor Oriental peasants who have seldom eaten a square meal in their lives choosing to fight us?</p>
                                        <p>Why does Communism appeal to so many people? Is it because we have failed as Christians?</p>
					<p>Why are we in this mess? Because you have sought security outside of yourself instead of accepting responsibility. Because you left matters to the politicians, took their bribes of pensions and subsidies, and their impossible promises of prosperity.</p>
					<p>My guilt⁠—For seven years I have refused to pay income taxes for war and bombs. I am fasting for these five days as a penance for not having awakened more people to the fact that the way of Jesus and Gandhi is not the way of the atom bomb. This war, like the last two, will not bring peace and freedom.</p>
					<p>What can you do now? We made a revolution against England and are not free yet. The Russians made a revolution against the Czar and now have an even stronger dictatorship. It is not too late to make a revolution that will mean something⁠—one that will stick⁠—your own one-man revolution. It is not too late to be a man instead of a pipsqueak who is blinded by the love of money.</p>
					<p>Are you a producer or a parasite? Why not cease voting for all politicians? Why not refuse to make munitions or to go to war? Why pay income taxes for your own destruction?</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>I had made a hinge in the middle of the handle of the larger sign so I could carry it on a bus. Jack and I had stayed at Rik’s the night before. As we left for the bus-stop a carpenter going to work stopped and gave us a ride most of the way downtown. Jack took the signs and waited in the cool of the Greyhound station while I went to <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s to mass. I asked for guidance and light.</p>
				<p>I had a small quantity of leaflets, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s, and folded tax statements in the back pocket of my Levi’s. I had walked the three sides of this block three other times when I picketed against payment of taxes, so the ground was familiar. Shouts of “Go back to Russia, you Commie!” were frequent. One Catholic lady who said she had bought <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s from me at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s cordially took a slip. When I walked on, a man shouted for me to go back to Russia. The lady turned to him and said “Go back to Russia yourself!”</p>
				<p>Those who fast do not stop to eat so I kept on during the noon hour. A few now and then greeted me kindly, but most were fearful to be seen speaking to me, and many shouted insults. About 3 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> a news reporter and photographer stopped me for an interview. A crowd gathered around. One man was especially noisy, poking his finger in my face and shouting, “Russia,” “the boys in Korea,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> One big man said that back in his state, they took fellows like me and threw them in the river.</p>
				<p>“Where do you come from Buddy?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“From Ohio, long the Ohio River,” he replied.</p>
				<p>“So do I, and I was acting like a radical there when I was 16 and no one threw me in,” I answered quickly. The crowd laughed. Another big fellow said that if I came back tomorrow with my “damn Communist papers” they would take me out in the desert and throw me up against a cactus and I would stick there. In a very quiet voice, but firmly, I said:</p>
				<p>“You are not really as mean a man as you make out to be.”</p>
				<p>At this the crowd melted away, although my two interrogators insulted me as I passed by with my sign again. But they could find no one to back them up. Jack had been on the outside of the crowd and a lady told him, not knowing that he was my friend, that I was not a Commie for I picketed here every year.</p>
				<p>After 4 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Schumacher, my tax man, came up and handed me a card which read:</p>
				<p>“Seized for the account of the United States on 8-7-50 by virtue of warrant for distraint issued by the collector of internal revenue, district of Arizona. Deputy Collector … One poster for picket line.”</p>
				<p>Actually there were three posters but I handed them over saying that I would get some new ones made and picket the next day. I continued handing out leaflets and <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s without my signs until Rik met me at 5:30 <abbr class="time eoc">p.m.</abbr></p>
				<p>Rik made new signs that night and marked them “This sign is the personal property of Joseph Craigmyle” <em>but the tax man did not try to take them</em>. The <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Arizona Republic</i> had a good picture of myself and signs on the page opposite the editorial page. The picture showed my large sign which read:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<h4>75%<br/>Of Your Income Tax<br/>Goes for War<br />And the Bomb</h4>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And on the reverse side⁠—</p>
				<blockquote>
					<h4>I Have<br/>Refused to Pay<br/>Income Taxes<br/>For the Last<br/>Seven Years</h4>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The 7:30 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> broadcast gave the above, after describing picketing of a restaurant by the <abbr class="initialism">AFL</abbr> union. One for union recognition. One for peace recognition.</p>
				<p>My sandwich sign, in front, as pictured in the paper read: “Reject War. Choose the Gandhi Way.” The reverse read: “Your Income Tax Upholds Foreign and American Imperialism.” As I picketed I presented first the sign with inch black border which read: “Hiroshima was <abbr class="initialism">A</abbr>-Bombed Five Years Ago. I am Fasting for Five Days in Memoriam.”</p>
				<p>I was much cheered to receive a telegram at the general delivery window from Dorothy and Bob Ludlow, the spiritual emphasis of which strengthened me as I glanced toward the tax man’s window expecting him to come and take my signs away. A Jehovah’s Witness was waiting for me in a car and said that he was my friend and had been on the edge of the crowd the day before. I had given him my literature then, he said. He was kindly but advised me to beware of the tricks of the Roman Catholic Church. I showed him Dorothy’s telegram and he admitted that he had never heard of such radical Catholics. I also met a young man, a veteran of five years, who said he was atheistic. After reading the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and other literature, he told me his Irish name and said he was a fallen-away Catholic who had never heard of such a fine radical paper as the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. Later I received word from him that he would see me at mass at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s the next Sunday.</p>
				<p>Jack kept bringing me water to drink. At 5 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr>, I was so tired I could hardly sit up. I went to Rik’s that night and slept 12 hours. I did not have any headache or stomach ache but now realized that I should have stopped for half-an-hour and rested during the day. I felt better the next morning.</p>
				<p>I had read in books, and Dorothy and others had told me, that Jesus meant something special. I also knew it from my time in solitary. All this time I could not see any connection between Jesus and the churches which supported capitalism and war. Wednesday morning, before picketing, I went to mass and in the midst of my fasting and prayer and picketing there came to me a feeling that Jesus on the cross here at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s did mean something especial to me. I have been quite smart in calling non-Christian Anarchists pipsqueaks and in admitting that I had much courage and wisdom. I have known all along that I lacked that love which radiates from Dorothy and true <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>s. Now, as I looked over the congregation I did not feel so smart. I felt a desire to be one of them and to help them instead of being so critical. Maybe this is the beginning, but what there is of value that comes to me will have to come from the heart and not from the intellect. This does not mean that I condone church support of war and capitalism. It means that I will not allow it to keep me from God and from Jesus who was a true rebel.</p>
				<p>I went with Jack to the Greyhound and rested for half an hour in the middle of the morning. I also took a salt tablet now and then, as it was 109 degrees in the shade and much hotter on the pavement. (Whether this is a superstition or whether it does me good I am not sure.) My <abbr class="initialism">J.W.</abbr> friend stopped to see me. Two Franciscan priests, whom I did not know personally, took my literature gladly. One priest called my name from his car. I had corresponded with his atheistic uncle and had sent him a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, so he knew who it ought to be that was picketing the post office. The tax man passed and smiled and made no motion to take my signs. There was not quite so much name calling as on Monday. To picket one day is not so bad for you come and go and the super-patriots may not know about it. But to give notice you are picketing for five days gives an opportunity for anyone to beat you up. It only takes one fellow to picket and it only takes one fellow to knock him down. In the afternoon the leader of those who had reviled me stopped with a friendly smile and apologized, saying that he had been drunk, that now he knew what my ideas were. Each day of my fast now he performed kindly acts to help me and argued with others that I was a fine fellow. One of my employers came along in a car and took me to a nearby park where I rested on the grass for half an hour. Just at this time some Catholic Anarchist friends came by looking for me, and someone told them that I had been arrested. One of my <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> priest friends called Rik and found out that I was still free and picketing. Because of the two intermissions I had, I felt fine that night.</p>
				<p>The next morning it was cloudy. The cap that I wore while picketing had a double length green visor and was given to me by a Catholic veteran who had used it in the navy. This morning I forgot it. It seems that God tempers the wind to the shorn lamb for it was not so hot today. I was glad to receive several letters from Dorothy and a card from a Quaker anarchist in Paris who somehow had heard of my picketing. I drank about a gallon of water every day, Jack bringing around the jug about every half hour. I was not very weary and I walked at a slower pace, but I would not have run a mile for a million.</p>
				<p>In the afternoon the tax man came along and good naturedly said that he had a bid of $5 for my signs from someone who wanted them as a souvenir. (I did not ask him if he was the bidder.) I had given him <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s before and had shown him Dorothy’s telegram. Now he was friendly and asked about my life, my daughters, my ideas, and said that he understood my opposition to the status quo. Like the tax man before him he was a Catholic. He felt, as I did, that there was nothing personal. He had his duty to do. He had tried to garnishee my wages, and had taken away my signs so he could report some activity on his part. He said I had a right to peacefully picket and departed in a friendly spirit. We met several times later as I picketed. He did not like my reference to himself as a servant of Caesar in a letter I had written to him. I told him this was perhaps a poetic way of saying it, but I meant it.</p>
				<p>The last day of my picketing was the hottest of all. To tell the truth I became a clock-watcher and drank more water than ever. I met a few surly people now and then, but more and more people took my leaflet. One elderly man took my leaflet and remarked that he and his family were friends of mine, for I had given literature to his wife the day before and he had read my tax statement and leaflet to his congregation of fundamentalists at his little mission west of Phoenix. One man whose employment kept him near to my picketing had muttered patriotic obscenities all the times I had picketed here. Today he was pleasant and wondered how I got by without paying taxes. I handed my leaflet to a lady whose face seemed familiar. She refused it, saying, “You gave me one Monday. I took it home and read it and burned it. I wouldn’t have such trash in my home.” It was my defender of the first day who had told the man to go back to Russia.</p>
				<p>During these five days about a sixth of the people called me names. About half of them were fearful, but if one in a row took literature the others followed, and if one refused the others did likewise. The remainder were friendly. Nearly all Negroes and Mexicans took my literature. I began the fast weighing 143 pounds. I ended it weighing 129. Now, a week later, I weigh 140. I broke the fast with tomato juice, a peach, pear, plum, orange, and grapes, and was digging a ditch at 9 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> the next day, and have been hard at work ever since.</p>
				<p>One of my good friends in Phoenix is Joe Stocker, New Dealer, and former editor of Anna Roosevelt’s daily paper which had a short life here. He is now a freelance writer. He is far from being an anarchist and is not a pacifist. His wife Ida had her first baby while I was picketing and fasting.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Hopi Snake Dance Again</h3>
				<p>I was rested up from my picketing and went up for the Hopi Snake Dance <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 23, starting to walk on the road from Leupp’s Corners as Rik and I had done before. After walking 19 miles, the tenth car that came my way picked me up. The air was clear and the sky was bright, and I enjoyed the walk. The snake dance this year was at Dan’s home, Hotevilla. A thousand or more people were there. This being the radical village, there was no soda pop for sale or any commercialism as we had witnessed the year before at First Mesa. There were no government or Hopi stooge police, nor any drunks or disturbances. My Hopi friend’s small girl sat astride of my neck during part of the snake dance. A white man came up and asked me how my small daughter liked the dance. I was tanned, but to be mistaken for a Hopi was an honor indeed. The snake dance followed the same pattern as last year and hundreds of years. Knowing hardly anything of Hopi tradition compared to what there was to know, I felt a part of this ceremony without understanding it. I felt at home with the Hopi.</p>
				<p>In the morning before we went to the dance I went to my Hopi friend’s garden and helped him hoe in the sandy soil. I never saw such a big hoe. I thought I was a good worker but I couldn’t keep up with the Hopi. After the snake dance it rained, as it always does. That night I met with about twenty of the radical Hopi at Shungopovy. They asked me questions about my work, my tax refusal, about Dorothy, and the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. As I looked around each Hopi was a distinct personality. They smiled and nodded approval (when my Hopi friend translated my answers to their questions). We left at 2 <abbr class="time eoc">a.m.</abbr></p>
				<p>We visited the colorful Butterfly Dance at Hotevilla the next day. This goes on for hours and hours all day, in relays, both men and women dancing. I met a silversmith from Scottsdale, whose English name is Morris Robinson. He had been in jail in Keams Canyon and was a rebel. He had married a Pima Indian. I met the Hopi conscientious objectors. There had been a morning race over desert waste and up the cliff to Hotevilla, and Paul’s son won the race, as Paul had when he was younger. The next day I rode with relatives of my Hopi friend to Flagstaff. About half way we heard a noise and there was a hole in the gas tank! The Indian woman quickly grabbed bubble gum from a child and stopped the leak. Ezra, the young <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>, heard us referring to Tucson Road Camp, and in a matter-of-fact way said, “That is where we all will be again soon.” The white man would deny the possibility and evade the issue as long as he could. The Hopi face facts. Before I left I spent three hours trying to explain pacifism to Mormon missionaries who were staying in New Oraibi, but I think I wasted my time.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Hopi Message</h3>
				<p>Around the middle of September I was asked to meet in Flagstaff two young editors of a radical weekly published in Los Angeles, to go with them to the Hopi, and introduce them to my friends. These young men had been <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>s whom I had known by reputation but whom I had never met. The day we arrived was also the day when men from each village were meeting at a Hopi home to prepare a letter to Truman about the draft of Hopi to the war in Korea. While they were busy at this meeting I drove with my friends to Old Oraibi and we met Don, to Hotevilla and Bacobi, and over to Shungopovi on Second Mesa. Soon after we returned to the home of a Hopi friend, the government-stooge Hopi, who had been elected by his own kind as Governor of the village, came and gave notice that I and my friends were not welcome here because we were having a secret meeting. We explained that we were here visiting and not taking any part in the meeting, for we could not understand Hopi. I had made the mistake of writing a postal card to my friend saying that we would be here. The postmaster in Oraibi was head of the government Tribal Council so of course the word got around that we were having this secret meeting. My Hopi friends stood up for our rights and their rights to meet as they wished.</p>
				<p>The next day, as was our plan, we left for Flagstaff. My friends continued to Los Angeles, and finding that I had to wait for a bus I called up my old friends from Cincinnati and Phoenix, Virgil and Ysobel Maddox. They asked me to skip another bus and come out for the night. Previously they had invited Piatt and Barbara Cline over for the evening. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cline is editor of the Flagstaff daily. He had been reading the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> for a short time and said that he liked my articles about life in Arizona. He had been a member of the legislature at one time and was in the right mood to read about anarchism. He was sympathetic to the Quakers, and his wife was Mormon. From that meeting we became very good friends, and he has given me fine publicity whenever I have picketed. His paper is the only one in this country, other than the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, which prints the views of the real Hopi as contrasted to the apologies for the government appearing elsewhere.</p>
				<p>In the latter part of October <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Time</i> magazine had a note that the appeal of the Hopi against the draft was Communist-inspired. It quoted as authority Ramon Hubbell, old time trader among the Indians. I at once sent <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Time</i> an air mail telling them that the Hopi were pacifist for centuries long before Karl Marx was heard of. After some more correspondence I received the following note from <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Time</i>:</p>
				<p>“Referring to your letter of <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 7, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Time</i> made no error in its October 23 report on the Hopi Indians. We correctly stated what <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hubbell told us.”</p>
				<p>My reply was as follows:</p>
				<p>“Received your alibi on printing the misinformation of trader Hubbell libeling the peaceful Hopi as Communist-inspired. He has absolutely no authority for this false assertion. In choosing your sources of information you show your plain intent to slander those whom you stand no chance of corrupting. To correctly print a lie is not telling the truth.”</p>
				<p>For several years I had sent <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hubbell copies of what I had written in the Catholic Worker about the Hopi, but he had not replied. It was not until later that the uneasy conscience of that trader had multiplied the visit of myself and friends into Communists being there to influence the Hopi.</p>
				<p>The real nature of the Hopi opposition to the draft may be seen in the following letter which was printed in the December, 1950 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> with the following note: “The above letter was sent out by our friends and brothers … The Phoenix papers commented that the signers of the letter represented 50% of the Hopi and were respected leaders.”</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Hopi Indian Sovereign Nation<br/>Oraibi, Arizona<br/>October 8, 1950</p>
                                        <p>Harry S. Truman,<br/>President of the United States,<br/>Washington, <abbr class="postal eoc">D.C.</abbr></p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> President:</p>
					<blockquote><p>“I also wish to assure the members of both the Hopi and Navajo Tribes that their religion and social customs will be fully respected in accordance with this nation’s long-established laws and traditions.” ―Harry <abbr class="name">S.</abbr> Truman</p></blockquote>
					<p>Today our ancient Hopi religion, culture, and traditional way of life are seriously threatened by your nation’s war efforts, Navajo-Hopi bill, Indian Land Claims Commission and by the Wheeler Howard bill, the so-called Indian self-government bill. These death-dealing policies have been imposed upon us by trickery, fraud, coercion, and bribery on the part of the Indian Bureau under the government of the United States, and all these years the Hopi Sovereign Nation has never been consulted. Instead, we have been subjected to countless number of humiliations and inhuman treatment by the Indian Bureau and the government of the United States. We have been dipped in sheep-dipping vats like a herd of sheep. Our young girls and women folks were shamefully disrobed before the people, and they were either pushed or thrown into these vats filled with sulphur water. Our religious headmen were beaten, kicked, clubbed with rifle butts, their hair cut, and after being dragged were left bleeding on the grounds in their villages.</p>
					<p>These immoral acts were done to us by the government of the United States, all because we want to be peaceful, to live as we please, to worship and make our livelihood the way our Great Spirit Massau’u has taught us.</p>
                                        <p>Hopi Sovereign Nation has been in existence long before any white man set foot upon our soil, and it is still standing. It will continue to hold all land in this western hemisphere in accordance with our Sacred Stone Tablets for all his people who are with him here.</p>
					<p>But now you have decided without consulting us; you have turned away from us by leading your people down the new road to war. It is a fearful step that you have taken. Now we must part. We, the Hopi leaders, will not go with you. You must go alone. The Hopi must remain within his own homeland. We have no right to be fighting people in other lands who have caused us no harm. We will continue to keep peace with all men while patiently waiting for our “true brother” whose duty it is to purify this land and to punish all men of evil hearts. Because we have never fought your government, never relinquished our rights and authority to any foreign nation, and made no treaty with your government whereby our young Hopi men be subject to conscription laws of the United States. Therefore we demand that you, as President of the United States, now and for all times, stop the drafting of our young Hopi men and women, and release immediately all those who are now in the armed forces of the United States. And we also demand that a full and complete investigation of the Navajo-Hopi bill, so-called Hopi Tribal Council, and the Indian Bureau be made by the President of the United States Congress and the good people of the United States. This is your moral obligation to the Red Man, upon whose land you have been living. Time is short, and it is our sacred duties as leaders of our people to bring these truths and facts before them. We must set our house in order before it is too late. If the government of the United States does not begin now to correct many of these wrongs and injustices done to the Red Man, the Hopi Sovereign Nation shall be forced to go before the United Nations with these truths and facts. We are,</p>
					<p>Sincerely yours,<br/>Dan Katchongva, Advisor, Sun Clan, Hotevilla, Arizona<br/>Andrew Hermequaftewa, Advisor, Blue Bird Clan, Shungopovy, Arizona</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Making the Winter Garden</h3>
				<p>Having nearly fathomed the mysteries of the harness which equipped the blind and deaf mules borrowed from a neighbor (I milked his cow while he caught the wild animals), I hitched them to a disc and prepared the garden, irrigated two weeks before. A clump of Johnson grass here and there defiantly showed remnants of green after the rest of the garden was a pleasant brown. A harrow leveled off the ground nicely. One row of eggplant and peppers remained from the summer garden. The hot August weather had nearly burned them up, but now near the end of September they were blooming again and would produce until heavy frost.</p>
				<p>The Old Pioneer brought twine and we measured out straight rows. We hitched the blind mule to the plow and the Old Pioneer led as I made⁠—not the straightest row in Missouri or Arizona⁠—but one good enough for the purpose. We came back over the furrow to make the ground even on both sides of it. By 1 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> I had returned the mules and had started to plant. The rows are 81 feet long. I have never worked elsewhere in such fine mellow ground: not a hard lump of dirt to be found. It had rained while I had been up to the Hopi and thus any clods that remained from the plowing around the first of August, when I had driven the mules and Jack Yaker had tried his first stint with the plow, were now dissolved. The furrows were about a foot and a half in depth. I leveled off the ground between them with a rake, then took a hoe and chopped half way down the edge of the furrow to make sure that the ground was fine and crumbly as a bed for seeds. Then I made an inch furrow along this edge where I judged the line of irrigation water would about reach.</p>
				<p>First I planted a row of radishes. Then taking a chance that we would have a late frost, I planted 46 hills of Irish potatoes in the next row. Last year I had planted them in August, and it was so hot that they dried up in the hill instead of growing. The trick with potatoes is to have the ground loose and high enough above the furrow so that the top is always dry; the water on either side subbing up and making sufficient moisture. Next I planted two rows of chard, the green leaves of which would mix well with the carrots, to be pulled each day for a salad from the next two rows. A row of onion seed and onion sets provided a different shade of green in the garden, followed by three rows of beets. We had made four rows for the planting of peas in November, two beds for the tomatoes in the spring, and two wide beds for watermelon in the spring. It was after dark before I stopped to eat supper, but all had been planted except two rows of beets.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>One Bowl</h3>
			        <p>Long before I had known that Gandhi ate from one bowl⁠—the aluminum one which he brought from prison⁠—I had told the women folks that they cluttered themselves up with too many dishes. Sometimes my sister-in-law at whose home I lived for a year in Milwaukee called me “one-bowl Hennacy” and minimized the quantity of utensils around my place at the table. To my mind the simple life means that one should eat that which is at hand and buy from the store only when it is absolutely necessary. As long as I have Irish potatoes in the garden they form the bulk of my main meal. When they are gone, I do not buy potatoes but eat eggplant, peppers, and onions, which are delicious fried. When I worked in a dairy I made my own cottage cheese, but now that is one thing that I buy at the store. Except for the months of August, September, and October I have chard and spinach and carrots which make a fine salad, so then I really have two bowls instead of one. When I worked at a chicken ranch in Albuquerque I ate cracked eggs by the dozen. Since then I seldom buy eggs. When I worked in the large apple orchard there and wrote of my visits to the nearby Isleta Indians, I had apples every day of the year⁠–⁠and apple dumpling and apple cider part of the time, except in April, May, and June. Here also I had asparagus seven months in the year. It grew wild in the orchard, and all that was needed was to cut the shoots every few days and not allow them to go to seed. When cold weather came, I never bought this very expensive product of the canning factory having had my share during the remainder of the year.</p>
				<p>Apples do not grow in this valley and I seldom buy them. Oranges and grapefruit trees are nearby and pomegranates and figs in season. The Old Pioneer will plant some grapevines this month. We had watermelon each day from June first to August 12th. And of course we had free access to the hundreds of acres of commercial cantaloupes all around us. Our one failure has been tomatoes. While we have had some to eat there has not been enough in proportion to the effort expended. Our rows were too narrow and we gave them too much water and they got too much sun. This spring we will plant them in rows five feet apart and with irrigation only on the outer side. Then the plants can produce leaves and shade as protection from the sun. We have used no commercial fertilizer. I have a small compost pit.</p>
				<p>The second Monday after I had planted my garden the Old Pioneer called his brother-in-law, Joe, and he and I hitched ourselves to each end of a broomstick which had a rope in the center attached to a small cultivator. The Old Pioneer was the driver as we roughed up the ground between the rows. “Damn burros,” mumbled Joe.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Broken Arrow</h3>
				<p>This week I was pleasantly surprised to hear the voice of my Hopi friend on the phone. Catherine Howell, a Quaker woman who had been living for several months in Hopi villages and who had now learned the distinction between the real Hopi and the government stooges who accept favors from the whites and thus betray their people, had driven to Phoenix to visit Rik’s wife Ginny who was an old-time friend. My Hopi friend came along. He wanted to get some information about the letter to be sent to Truman and also to bootleg a job at his trade as a stone mason where there would be no withholding tax for war. He brought a yellow watermelon and some piki. Piki was made a thousand years before Post and Kellogg and consists of rolls of grey or pink toasted corn of the taste and texture of cornflakes. He had never visited my place. I pointed out the middle room which could be his at any time.</p>
				<p>I have refused to attend the movies since 1942 as I do not want to pay a war tax. But I hinted to my friends that I was willing to be an accessory-to-the-fact and attend a movie to see the true story of Cochise, the great Apache leader for whom a county is named in the mining region of south eastern Arizona. I had read the book <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Blood Brother</i> by Elliot Arnold and understood that this account of a white man who made friends with Cochise and secured peace between the Apaches and the whites was correct Arizona history⁠—aside from the love story that had to be put in.</p>
				<p>So Rik was the host for my Hopi friend, Joe Craigmyle, and myself to see <i epub:type="se:name">Broken Arrow</i>. The Hopi said that the Indian customs presented were fairly accurate. The Apache speak somewhat sharply, like the Navajo, while the Hopi are entirely different in expression. The only criticism of the play that I had was the fact that the most stirring and incriminating part of the play was merely referred to, not acted out. This was when the army commander offered a flag of truce and coldly ordered Cochise, his brother, and four others murdered in the tent where the truce was held. The others died right there but Cochise had a knife in his loin cloth, cut a hole in the tent, escaped, and began his famous ten year war against the treacherous whites.</p>
				<p>When peace had been made by Tom Jeffords, the hero, the army general made the promise that no soldiers would be stationed on the Apache reservation. Those who have seen this movie and do not know Indian history should be told that Tom Jeffords had to quit as Indian Agent because the government broke its word and sent troops. They should also learn that during the administration of <abbr>Gov.</abbr> Safford⁠—one of the many carpetbag neer-do-wells sent from Washington when Arizona was a territory⁠—a special trip was made by the Governor to Washington where he had the boundaries of the Apache Reservation changed in order that the copper companies could get the land they wanted. Safford is now a copper town. Thus the wealth which enabled the Big Companies to run the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr>’s out of Bisbee in 1916.</p>
				<p>Those interested in Indian history should read <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Apache</i> by Will Levington Comfort, the Quaker writer. It is a small book written many years ago and tells of the childhood and life of Mangas Coloradas (bloody sleeves), the brother-in-law of Cochise, and of his final death when murdered as a prisoner of war. Now with the whites bribing the Indian leaders for oil and uranium leases, the further robbing of the Indians continues. The message which the radical Hopi bring, along with the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> Christian anarchist emphasis, provide the only hope in this crazy war-mad world.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Truman’s Emergency</h3>
				<p>“How are you going to get people to put up the sword? My son died in Korea. I know you didn’t kill him. God bless you!” said an elderly woman as I was picketing the post office in Phoenix, <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 18, 1950 in response to Truman’s “emergency” declaration. The woman had seen my big sign which read:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<h4>“Put up thy Sword<br/>He that taketh<br/>the Sword<br/>Shall Perish<br/>by the Sword.”<br/>―Jesus’ words.</h4>
				</blockquote>
				<p>On the reverse of this sign was a picture of a pot, colored green, with a sign on it⁠—<em>capitalist</em>. Opposite was a red kettle⁠—<em>Communist</em>. Underneath was the caption:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<h4>“The Pot Calls the Kettle Black”</h4>
				</blockquote>
				<p>My other signs told of my regular refusal to pay taxes and mentioned Gandhi. I attended mass at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s before picketing and prayed for peace and wisdom. I felt that I would surely get beat up but that the “emergency” had to be met. In another church that morning a <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> priest said mass for the success of my witness for peace. I had noticed the city manager and the tax man that I would picket against the war emergency. Ginny Anderson stood on one corner to hand me extra literature and be my “lookout,” to report trouble if I was beaten. Byron Bryant, Catholic anarchist, home on Christmas vacation from his duties as teacher of English in a Western University, stood on the other corner. There was an unusual number of people coming and going around the holidays. No one advised me to go back to Russia or called me a Communist.</p>
				<p>“Extra, extra, all anarchists to be shot at sunrise,” shouted the good natured news man stationed in front of the post office as I passed by. When a later edition told of a robbery in Tucson of my friend Brophy’s Bank of Douglas, the paper man shouted as I went by: “Extra, extra, Gandhi robs a bank.”</p>
				<p>A woman looked at my sign and asked if I did not know that Jesus told Peter to sell his clothes and buy a sword. I answered, “Yes, but when Peter showed Him the sword which he had, Jesus did not say to cut off the other ear but said, ‘put up thy sword. He that taketh the sword shall perish by the sword.’ ” As the woman walked on she shouted back: “Jesus called for a sword so he could perform a miracle. He never said ‘put up thy sword,’ You better read your Bible.” I told her that I had read it six times in solitary, but there is little use in quoting scripture to these “Bible-bangers.”</p>
				<p>Somewhat different was a teenage boy who pointed to an ad of the Marines and said that meant more to him than my sign or my leaflet which he had just read. I told him that if he believed that way⁠—and he was to leave for war next month⁠—that he should do what he thought was right. He refused to take a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> although he was a Catholic and went to <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s. I hoped that he would return safely and could then confer with the priest as to the possibilities of being a pacifist Catholic. It was not his fault that he had never heard the pacifist message before. We parted in a friendly spirit.</p>
				<p>One gruff fellow asked, “What have you got there?” I answered, “It’s either very good or very bad: depends upon how you look at it. Better read it and see.” He smiled and went his way reading the leaflet.</p>
				<p>While Byron and I went for lunch, Frank Brophy, whose bank had been robbed, spoke to Ginny. Although the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> says “Starve the Bankers and Feed the Poor” he reads the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, and is not ashamed to be seen talking to me on the street, whether I am picketing or just selling <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s at the bus. A Catholic anarchist woman stopped to see us but missed us because of the following incident:</p>
				<p>We had only brought along 500 leaflets and now at 3 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> they were nearly all distributed. I went to get some more and two friends of Ginny’s asked her for my propaganda. So when I returned, I gave her some leaflets and she went in the post office and gave one to each of them as they had requested. A friend of hers in the tax office had asked for one also. I had sense enough to put the leaflet in an envelope for her to give to the tax man but not sense enough to advise her not to give the leaflets to her friends openly in the post office, which was government property.</p>
				<p>Later two cops came up and questioned me saying they were having too many complaints about my picketing. They read my signs and leaflet. I told them that what I was doing was clearly subversive and that the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr> and tax man had priority over them in my case and they ought to confer with them. One cop did so while the other asked me questions. Among other things he asked if Ginny had handed out leaflets in the post office. I told him to ask her, which he did, and she explained what she had done. Meanwhile people crowded around and watched my signs. I saw my tax man as he came near, and also an <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr> man.</p>
				<p>The police wanted to know what had been done when I had been arrested for picketing before. I told them that I had been released and had picketed seven more days without being bothered. They conferred with headquarters and suggested that Ginny and I accompany them to the police station. Here we waited about an hour while detectives and police looked over the signs and leaflet and asked questions. I offered a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> to one police captain but he refused it, saying that no Catholic paper could support such unpatriotic actions as mine. I asked him if he knew Father Dunne and he said he did. I advised him to call up and see what he said about me and the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. (Later Father Dunne told me that the man had phoned him.)</p>
				<p>Byron had phoned a Catholic attorney, friend of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, who spoke to Chief O’Clair. The Chief said we could go but I had better not picket or I might get into trouble. I told him that I was used to handling tough individuals and crowds and could take care of myself. He said that any charge such as disorderly conduct, loitering, <abbr>etc.</abbr> could be brought against me. I told him that was his business and that I would picket again on March 14th. He grinned and said, “That’s another day.”</p>
				<p>We went back again and gave away our few remaining leaflets. Postal employees looked out of the window and saw that the police had not stopped us. One of the calls against us had come from an ultra-patriotic postal employee who had noticed Ginny handing the two leaflets to her friends, one of the cops told me. The last leaflet I gave out was to a postal employee who had refused it earlier in the morning and now his curiosity had gotten the better of him. He read it standing where all could see, and praised me for my stand.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Lay Apostolate</h3>
				<p>During the winter Drew Pearson lectured in Phoenix. I had mailed his manager the current <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, my tax statement and One Man Revolution leaflet. I kidded him about supporting capitalism and war, and like Truman taking the Sermon on the Mount in vain. That inasmuch as he was invading my territory I had to write to him again. I had written to him in Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr> once before. That I couldn’t afford the high price of admission but would sell <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s outside to counterbalance his smokescreen. A friend gave me a ticket and I went to hear him. He was interesting enough but it wasn’t worth even a quarter. I sold plenty of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s and several thousand people heard, perhaps for the first time, “Catholic Worker, Catholic peace paper, one cent.”</p>
			</section>
			<hr/>
			<p>Just before election day of 1950 Rik and Ginny had moved to the suburb Scottsdale, a small town east of Phoenix that puts on the super-Western dog. Ginny rode around in shorts on a bicycle and Rik, who is by temperament bourgeois and only anarchist by intellect, chided her about “creating a bad impression in a new community.”</p>
			<p>Soon afterward we all attended a Democratic election rally in Scottsdale, because Ana Fromiller, the Democratic candidate for Governor, though not an anarchist, was a good friend of ours. Rik thought that the boys would like to sit on the front seat near the band to observe at close hand the machinations of the musical instruments. We all should have known better, but the first thing that happened was the playing of the Star Spangled Banner. Instinctively, and without a look or thought, one to the other, we all remained seated. We could not have put on a “worse show” or “created a worse impression” in this new community than by this action. We heard mumbling, but no action followed. Later Ginny and I kidded Rik about the “good impression” he was so worried about. <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">America, the Beautiful</i>, or even <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">America</i>, are good songs which we could arise to honor, but not the jingoistic “bombs bursting in air.” This incident, and one related later in this book, have a direct bearing on one of the momentous decisions of my life, but I did not realize it at that time.</p>
			<p>When I was waiting at the bus station one morning to go to Mesa to sell <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s, an elderly woman grabbed a paper from me, saying, “I could cut off the Pope’s head and sing to Jesus when I was doing it. I used to be a Catholic; now I am saved and washed in the blood of the lamb. And don’t talk back a word or I’ll tear you to pieces.” I didn’t and she went careening up the street.</p>
			<p>In contrast, while I was selling papers at the same spot an old man, with his few belongings tied up in a sack hanging from a stick over his shoulder in the traditional manner of hobos, stopped and looked at my display, saying, “I’ll have one.” I told him not to bother to unload himself to get the penny and gave him a paper and my tax statement. He had a bright and intelligent eye and replied with a smile: “I’m a good Catholic, on my way to Heaven. Name is Collins. God bless you.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
