<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 22</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter22" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 22</h2>
				<h3>I Leave the Catholic Church</h3>
				<h3>Salt Lake City, Utah</h3>
				<h3>1965⁠–⁠1968</h3>
			</header>
			<p>Some friends say I never was a Catholic. Whether I left the Church or the Church left me depends upon how you look at the question. Now after fifteen years in the Catholic Church I find that any increase in spiritual emphasis that I have gained has been in spite of and not because of attendance at Mass and taking Communion. So I do not think it worthwhile to call myself a Catholic. In solitary in 1918⁠–⁠19 I made my real conversion. This was the important event of my life. All since then, as may be said, is only on the surface.</p>
			<p>This book being the story of my life it would not be worthwhile writing it if I remained in the same groove into which I was born. Great changes have been made in the world and to meet those changes I have had to revalue what is important to me. These changes have not been to accommodate myself to the current, but as always to fight upstream against the current.</p>
			<p>In <a href="chapter-12.xhtml">Chapter 12 of this book</a> entitled “I Become A Catholic” I discuss in detail how this came about. I have often said that a person living in India would naturally be attracted by Gandhi. In this country the person with the most integrity as a pacifist and anarchist, as well as a Christian, is Dorothy Day. If she had been a Quaker or a Mormon and edited a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Quaker Worker</i> or a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Mormon Worker</i> I would have been attracted to those religions. I quoted Dorothy as saying that I should not become a Catholic because I loved her and the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. The reasons why I became a Catholic and was quickly baptized in 1952 (too quickly I think all concerned would agree), are still legitimate, taking my development at that time. I got along for 33 years as a Christian Anarchist without belonging to any church.</p>
			<dl>
				<dt>God</dt>
				<dd>I believe in everything I said on this subject in 1953, but I would add on the subject of the Devil that I do not think he is a person but is only the name for that which is the opposite of good.</dd>
				<dt>Hell</dt>
				<dd>might be called what the Christians have made of this earth, in Christ’s name. If there is such a place, as some priests say, you can’t prove there is anyone in it but the Devil. So I am not afraid of going to a place I do not believe exists.</dd>
				<dt>Purgatory</dt>
				<dd>is logical, but just how it works I will find out when I die. I am not worrying about it.</dd>
				<dt>The Bible</dt>
				<dd>I believe on this subject the same as I did in 1953. There may be some words from God in it, but most of it is folklore. Outside of what Christ said on divorce, and the usual interpretation of “Give to him that asked of thee,” I believe in all that Christ said. I think that He meant that we should not be selfish. I would not give a bum money to spend on booze but I do give the bum a place to sleep and something to eat in my Joe Hill House. I do not agree with the old Jewish idea of a divorced person not (being) allowed to be remarried. The Greek Orthodox Church allows two remarriages, but not three. I think that a person can make a mistake on every other decision in life, so why cannot they make a mistake in being married? Former Mayor O’Dwyer of New York City, Jackie’s sister, Henry Luce, and the President of Peru were allowed to be married after being divorced. The 16 rules of annulment of marriage by the Catholic Church seem to me not to be based on the saying(s) of Christ, but upon pull and expediency. I asked the Chancery office to annul my common law marriage, and they wouldn’t think of it.</dd>
				<dt>The Early Christians</dt>
				<dd>I agree with what I wrote on the subject in 1953, although I see little hope of the Catholic Church or any other church in trying to live like the early Christians.</dd>
				<dt>Paul and the Churches</dt>
				<dd>I believe on this subject what I said in 1955, that Paul spoiled the message of Christ.</dd>
				<dt>Prayer</dt>
				<dd>There can be spiritual power when spiritual people recite the Rosary, as I wrote in 1953, but today, for me, there is no meaning in praying to Mary or the saints, but only to Christ and God. I revere <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis, Joan of Arc, and Bernadette of Lourdes and get lessons and inspiration from them, but but I do not believe in the legend of Fatima and Guadaloupe. Each person can choose their own saints.</dd>
				<dt>The Catholic Church</dt>
				<dd>A Christian Anarchist has no business belonging to such a reactionary organization. I do not believe in original sin, indulgences, the infallibility of the Pope or obedience to any church official if it is against my conscience. I am not interested in earning “merit” or in being saved by priestly incantation. Of course I do not believe in confessing to a priest. Many Catholics can never forgive themselves because of the sense of fear and guilt taught them, and they go to priests again and again in a useless round. I believe in the virgin birth of Christ and in personal immortality, in all of Christ’s miracles, and in the resurrection. That we can be “saved” from sin by following Him, whether we belong to any church or not. I believe in God the Father and that the real members of any church are those who follow Christ, and also those outside of any church. I consider myself a member of this real church along with <abbr>St.</abbr> Joan of Arc, who was burned as a heretic by the Catholic Church. I made a will some years ago in which I desired to be cremated and my ashes put on the graves of the Haymarket anarchists in Waldheim Cemetery in Chicago. Later the Catholic Church allowed cremation.</dd>
				<dt>Communion</dt>
				<dd>The supposed effect of this sacrament has seldom changed Catholics into desiring to follow Christ, or there would not be this wholesale denying of Christ daily.</dd>
				<dt>Freedom</dt>
				<dd>exists as a theory in the Catholic Church. Let priests and nuns picket for strikers and Negroes and supposedly liberal bishops like Bishop Lucey of San Antonio are just as quick to punish them as Cardinal McIntyre of Los Angeles. Here in Salt Lake City I know priests who read <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Catholic Worker</i> and the liberal <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">National Catholic Reporter</i> and who really know better than to support war and the conservative system of society around them, but the fear they have makes them subservient to their conservative bishop.</dd>
				<dt>Love</dt>
				<dd>is a word used without meaning by the clergy. From the Pope down to the layman the emphasis upon pomp and wealth and prosperity while the world starves and wars go on is a denial of Christ.</dd>
				<dt>Heresy</dt>
				<dd>is a word that has no meaning to me now, for I renounce the whole system of Catholic or other theology which is based upon the fear of hell and the hope of getting into heaven by all sorts of dubious bargains.</dd>
				<dt>Reincarnation</dt>
				<dd>I think that this idea is the most logical, but really there is no answer to the problem of evil. If I don’t believe in reincarnation and it is true I’ll be reincarnated whether I believe in it or not. If it isn’t true, believing in it will not make it true. It is how you live that counts.</dd>
			</dl>
			<p>There are others “not of this fold” who remain followers of Christ. I choose to be among them. There is no reason for joining any other church for they all support exploitation, and mostly they support war. And I sure don’t want any Ammonites following me around!</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>In <a href="chapter-15.xhtml">Chapter 15</a> I mentioned that I was asked if I was an anarchist or a Catholic first. I said that I was first a Catholic, and being an anarchist came sixth. Now I would rephrase my emphasis as follows: </p>
			<ol>
				<li>To be an anarchist-pacifist and oppose as much as I can all war and violence, and the state which lives by these methods.</li>
				<li>This also means to be a Christian, a follower of Christ. Outside any church.</li>
				<li>To seek to understand and to love your enemy.</li>
				<li>Not to expect to make the world see this now, but to continue my one-man-revolution, no matter what the result is to me personally.</li>
				<li>To help the poor, especially the transients, for this is where the state leaves off and the anarchist begins.</li>
				<li>Not to smoke, drink, eat meat, or take medicine, and to approximate the life of the poor among whom I live.</li>
				<li>As stated in the following paragraph I recently married out of the Church, so in addition my personal emphasis is:<ol><li>To make my wife, Joan, happy, and help her and myself to grow in every way.</li><li>To continue to be awake enough to oppose war and exploitation in this crazy world; not to chicken out.</li><li>To search for more truth as to what is best for myself and the world.</li></ol></li>
			</ol>
			<hr/>
			<p>Two and a half years ago, soon after this book was published, I married a young lady, Joan Thomas, to whom I especially dedicated this book. The priests in Salt Lake City who knew about it forbad us to ever take communion. Although other priests over the country who knew the circumstances, said that the Church would change its mind some day on divorced persons remarrying, and offered to give us communion. As an anarchist I know it was not logical to get a divorce and be married by a justice of the peace in Nevada. As I was running the Joe Hill House I did not find it possible to go to Idaho, the only state in the west where Common-law is legal. If I was a polygamous I would not mind doing time for it, but I had no desire to interrupt the Joe Hill House by doing time for bigamy or cohabitation. The latter is a law made here to catch the polygamous. I have found Joan to be a very courageous woman, and the best, as far as character is concerned, of anyone I have met. Also, in all fairness to her I should add that she does not agree with nme in all things, although she is a pacifist and an anarchist. She uses both these terms non-politically and on the spiritual plane which commences with <abbr>St.</abbr> John of the Cross’s “the just man is above the law.” We both consider it a mark of genuine love that two persons with such divergent views are able to get along so well. She promised in so far as our marriage is concerned not to be wife as such, but to be my best friend as she holds friendship to be far more important than marriage. She is a believing Catholic and has not left the Church. She does not believe that our marriage is valid, but believes our friendship is.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>I value the friendship of many priests, nuns, and laymen in the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> movement, and others whom I have met in my travels, and I list Dorothy Day among the fifteen great people in American history. Although her statement in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> that she would obey Cardinal Spellman if he told her to keep quiet on the war is not a part of her <em>real</em> philosophy, but just a pious exclamation, uttered, I think, because most liberal Catholics were then condemning him because <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Berrigan had been sent to South America for his opposition to the war. Dorothy always is for the underdog. I doubt if she would obey Spellman if it came to a showdown.</p>
			<p>We have all helped each other. And of course I regret to have to cause them pain in leaving the Church. I have attended Mass here in Salt Lake City daily for years. With very few exceptions I have never met a Catholic here who had any conception of the social message of Christ. Catholics are not to be blamed, for their bishop never speaks on these problems and is only in print to praise something military or commercial, always in pious terms. If I had lived in a community like Milwaukee, where Bishop Cousins allows Father Groppi and priests and nuns to picket against closed housing, or in Oklahoma City, where Bishop Reed allows the open parish that meets informally in homes, I might possibly have tried a little longer to remain in the church. But here all that is mentioned is the Legion of Mary, Boy Scouts, Fatima, bingo parties, attacks on Communism and birth control, and of course always praise of the military.</p>
			<p>While my becoming a Christian, a pacifist, and an anarchist in prison in 1918⁠–⁠19 was gradual and without any outside influence, except the Bible and Tolstoy, my becoming a Catholic took fifteen years of association with the Catholic Worker and was a sort of osmosis, although the direct cause, <a href="chapter-12.xhtml">as given in Chapter 12</a>, was a culmination of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> atmosphere. The fifteen years from 1952 to 1967 allowed me to speak in scores of seminaries and hundreds of Catholic churches and schools and to meet the most liberal Catholics. I met French Worker priests and looked forward with hope to the efforts of Pope John <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span> and Pope Paul <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. I finally had to realize that only surface changes would ever come to the Vatican or the Pentagon, for they are built upon the basis of unlimited power and they are afraid of truth, not realizing as someone has said that, “truth has nothing to fear from truth.” They both will move only so far as they are pushed. When an especially obnoxious prelate dies there is always one trained by him to take his place.</p>
			<p>In the past 49 years I have changed my mind regarding religion three times and each time many of my friends decried these changes. I have tried life in the largest church and found it wanting. I can till sign myself, “In Christ the Rebel” without belonging to any church. I am still a rebel in my 75th year, against war, exploitation, capital punishment, and race hatred. I still look forward to the day when there will be more Christian Anarchists. I am not discouraged to be nearly alone in my one-man-revolution. Young folks will come along, perhaps some whom I have helped awaken, and they may do much better than I have done.</p>
			<p>Readers of my book in this country and in other countries of course are familiar with the conservatism of the Catholic Church and it is no news to them that in the Mormon state of Utah that church should run true to form. During the six years that I have been here I have written to the Bishop mildly at first, and then with more spirit, thinking that at least when the two Catholics, Garcia and Rivenburg, were to be executed he might say something. He wrote a short note saying he was opposed to my activities. I have twice been asked to speak to Catholic audiences here and the meetings have been cancelled. As a matter of record and as a challenge to those Catholics who continue to obey a Bishop who continually refuses to accept the social teachings of Christ, I include the last letter that I sent to him, dated August 29, 1967.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Dear Bishop Federal:</p>
				<p>I am puzzled about how to reach your conscience. In the past I have first asked you gently to take a stand against the death penalty involving two Catholics. When you paid no attention I got a little rough in order to wake you up, but you still hide away from expressing yourself on social problems. The Boy Scouts and the Salt Lake Palace receive your attention, but the war in Viet Nam against which half a dozen bishops have expressed themselves does not stir you. When I lef 150 people on April 15 asking why you did not follow the lead for peace given by Pope Paul, the only answer was a sermon the next day giving the Bishop’s approval of the war. You do not have a warmonger over you as Bishop Sheen has in Cardinal Spellman, yet he was not afraid.</p>
				<p>President McKay and Joseph Fielding Smith are in their 90s and they may not change in their very conservative views of their time. It seems that for the Catholics in Utah you have determined to stand 100 years behind the times and allow no change in your remaining term, which should be longer than that of McKay and Smith. Why should any liberal Mormon convert to such a Catholic Church as you present in this state? As I have asked before, what does it take to wake you up? I doubt if Joseph Smith or Moroni came back they would be able to change the Mormon Apostles, I also doubt if Christ came you would know it, for He would likely be on the other side of the tracks and be dressed poorly, and if He came to the Cathedral He would be ejedted as a bum. He has said to forgive and to love. He would likely overturn the bingo tables in your churches. By your silence you emphasize gambling, the worship of money, and the execution of Poulsen, and the war in Viet Nam.</p>
				<p>I respect the testimony of <abbr>Msgr.</abbr> Moreton, who was formerly chaplain of the state prison. He always opposed capital punishment. But when I attended hearings of the Board of Pardons in Poulsen’s case the Catholic Chaplain sat their cowardly and said not a word. Surely he knew better. Why are priests under your jurisdiction afraid to speak up? The Protestant Chaplain and the head of the Council of Churches, a Mormon professor, and a Jew, and the Episcopal Dean spoke for clemency. I repeat, why are Catholic priests afraid or not interested?</p>
				<p>A Professor at the <abbr class="initialism">U</abbr> sent out a questionnaire on capital punishment to 500 people. He was surprised to find many Catholics against it. He asked if any member of the legislature would pull the trigger to execute a prisoner. None of them would. You and they elect others to do it for you. Peter and all of the Apostles said to obey God rather than man. Why do you deny God and obey man?</p>
				<p>Whenever we are picketing downtown against capital punishment and war we will come up to the Cathedral for a minute in protest against your docility.</p>
				<p>Many people have come from out of town and phoned your office asking where the Joe Hill House of Hospitality for Transients is located, and have not been told. We are at 3462 <abbr class="compass">S.</abbr> 4. <abbr class="compass">W.</abbr> (2 blocks south of the Vitro smokestack.) Poulsen’s 7th execution date is set for Tuesday, September 5.</p>
				<p>Sincerely in Christ<br/> Ammon Hennacy</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p> A couple of years ago a young man interviewed me. He was writing a book about people of the right and of the left. This week I received his book, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Farther Shores of Politics</i> by George Thayer, Simon and Schuster. In his chapter on The Peace Movement he discusses my anarchist and vegetarian ideas especially and says that I have “actually renounced his Catholicism.” </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
