<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 11</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter11" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 11</h2>
				<h3>Traveling</h3>
				<h3>September 21⁠–⁠December 16, 1952</h3>
				<h4>In the East and Middle West; to Phoenix</h4>
			</header>
			<p>“I didn’t know the Catholic Worker had a right wing,” said a young Quaker social worker to me, as we met in the office of the National Council for the Prevention of War in Washington, <abbr class="postal eoc">D.C.</abbr> I had just mentioned, in conversation, that Tom Sullivan and Mike Harrington chose the lesser of the Second and Third evils in the current campaign. We had a Pacifist Conference at Peter Maurin Farm, early in September, and Mike had spoken for the Socialists. He was practically alone among us anarchists. In defense, he said that if the Socialists were in power, then he would be an anarchist. We told him to wake up and join the procession. Dorothy and I, and others, had gone through that parliamentary stage long ago. This Quaker in Washington had heard me give a Four Minute Man speech at the end of the staff meeting of the American Friends Service Committee, in Philadelphia, a few days before.</p>
			<p>Arlo Tatum, alumnus of Sandstone prison, with whom I was staying, had introduced me to the Service Committee as “a Christian Anarchist who lives like the early Christians,” so I commenced by telling them that, as they expected the worst, I had better put my worst foot forward and give it to them strong in the few minutes I had. I said that my Quaker ancestors had hidden escaped slaves before the Civil War, and had thus met the challenge of that day. Today, since <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 6, 1945, when the Atom Bomb was dropped at Hiroshima, the challenge was whether we approved of that devilish action. Dorothy and I refused to pay income taxes, but all those present had taxes taken from their pay to support war, and in doing so they were committing a terrible sin. I mentioned that I had been a social worker myself for eleven years, and now had been doing menial manual labor in the fields for ten years, so that no withholding tax could be taken from my pay. I knew what endless work it was to pick up the pieces of human wreckage at the bottom of the cliff, but that we of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> did this now, and we did more than this, for we had the one sure radical method of seeing that people did not fall over the cliff in the first place. This method was that of the One Man Revolution within the heart of man, without depending upon political revolutions, which only changed masters. I repeated my anarchist argument, <a href="preface.xhtml">as given in the Frontispiece of this book</a>. I ended up by telling of Dorothy’s kneeling while they sang the <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">Star Spangled Banner</i> in Church. Afterwards, some well-known Quakers congratulated me on my strong message, while others walked out in a somewhat dazed condition, asking Arlo how they ever allowed such a fellow inside the premises.</p>
			<p>I had spoken, also, to an adult group at a Quaker church in Philadelphia where 98% of the members were pacifists, and had sat on the fronting bench during the silent meeting. My good tax refuser friends, the Longstreths, had invited me there. I also spoke to the War Resisters League, and met Ned Richards and family, <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>s and tax refusers from away back. I met a fine group of young pacifists in Philadelphia.</p>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Washington, <abbr class="postal eoc">D.C.</abbr></h3>
				<p>Here I arrived at the very minute that my friend Ed Lahey, of the Knight Newspapers, was leaving by plane for New Orleans, so I missed him again. I spent the night, and spoke at <abbr>St.</abbr> Martin de Porres House, where Llewellyn Scott has held forth, almost alone, for years. He works to pay the upkeep, and does well to give out clothing the year around, and to have something hot in the winter months for those who need it early in the morning. The young folks at Friendship House were an earnest group, with a fine spirit. I had more time, and tried not to be so blunt as I had been with the sophisticated Quakers but, in the end, I said about the same. Father Owen beamed his approval throughout my talk, and Mary Huston, the leader, thanked me.</p>
				<p>I had written to Fred Libby, of the National Council for the Prevention of War, in 1917, when he headed a peace organization. His secretary sent me money for help in my anti-draft campaign, saying that this was from her, personally, as the organization was more conservative. Libby is an agile and friendly man of 77, from generations of farmers up in Maine, Henry Beston told me. He works with politicians and has hopes of disarmament, but I was glad to meet him again. He appreciated very much the extreme left position of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, and introduced me to Jim Finucane and his office staff. I spent the night with him and his charming wife. His “thee and thou” reminded me of my Quaker great-grandmother. The weather was rainy and cold.</p>
				<p>I met one friend at the Indian Bureau, who had met the Hopi that Easter week of 1950, and who appreciated the true Hopi. He did not begin to be as radical as many with whom I associate, but he knew what the words meant, read the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, and enjoyed the Hopi songs which I played on his player that night at his home.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Boston</h3>
				<p>In Boston I was happy to meet John and Helen Cort, and their five bouncing children. They had recently moved to a big house on a hill in Brighton, overlooking Cambridge. The view out of the kitchen window was enough to make any woman forget the worries of housework. John is organizer for the Newspaper Guild, spent years around the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, and knew Peter well. Dark, handsome, Irish Joe Dever came over one evening, and he and John received an antidote to their enthusiastic support of “the people’s choice.” They had heard the anarchist message before, but they could not yet be so radical. I told them that they were young, and there was no hurry. After mass, John went upstairs, and later came down with an article, “The Charms of Anarchism,” for <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">The Commonweal</i>, which he read to me. Joe laughed and said, “First he praises you, and then he sticks in the knife,” I told them I was used to that, and could take it.</p>
				<p>John drove me over to meet Pitirim Sorokin at Emerson Hall, and came for me after I had visited for several hours with my old friend from Ohio State University in 1915, Arthur M. Schlesinger, <abbr class="eoc">Sr.</abbr> Sorokin had been imprisoned both by the Czar and the Communists, under sentence of death for six weeks by the latter. He accepted the Christian Anarchist position, but in small letters instead of in capital ones. His approach was that of getting the same result, if possible, by having educators giving their fine minds to the problem. He had figured out something similar to <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#OneInAMillion">my Love, Courage, and Wisdom thought</a>. Bob Ludlow had said that I would meet my equal as a conversationalist when I met Sorokin, so when either one of us would stop for a breath, or out of good manners, the other would get in a word. The remark by Bob was proven justified. I had admired <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Schlesinger because he was chairman of a committee that had asked the Governor of Massachusetts to allow a statue of Sacco and Vanzetti to be placed on Boston Common. Too many liberals and radicals forget their ideals as they become older.</p>
				<p>Schlesinger and John Cort had wanted me to meet Comrade Felicani, anarchist printer and old-time friend of Sacco and Vanzetti. I was glad to meet with him for half a day. Someone had sent him a clipping of Father Casey and me holding the only 25th anniversary meeting for Sacco and Vanzetti, on August 23rd, and he was pleased, although puzzled at the connection between priests and anarchists. I told him of Peter Maurin, founder of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, who, in June, 1934, had answered a certain John Cummings, who had wanted a Catholic Political Party, by saying:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>…a Catholic political party cannot stop Communism. Fascism, whether Catholic or Protestant, cannot stop Communism. Fascism is only a stop-gap between the rugged individualism of bourgeois capitalism and the rugged collectivism of Bolshevik Communism… The Catholic Worker Movement fosters Catholic social action and not Catholic political action.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>I told him in detail of the five priests in Phoenix who support my anti-tax efforts, and of the work of Dorothy and the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. He said he would be pleased to read her book and receive the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. I was glad to meet this old-time anarchist.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Henry Beston</h3>
				<p>Henry Beston, who ranks in my mind as a writer with Albert Jay Nock, had written to me, in 1945, praising my rendition of what an Isleta, <abbr class="postal">N.M.</abbr> Indian thought about the Bomb: “Stealing the brightness of Father Sun for devil worship.” He had sent me maple syrup at Christmas, and letters written in his superb handwriting. I came to his country home after dark, near Nobleboro, Maine. A more gracious man, with both hands extended in greeting, I have never met. Henry is not a political or economic radical, but opposes modern materialism because of his love of nature.</p>
				<p>The Bestons have a great collection of cow bells of all weights, tones, and shapes. Every time you open a door, a bell jingles, and when I left, Elizabeth waved her hand and rang the big dinner bell outside as a farewell greeting. This is also the House of Books and of Baskets. The only place I remember, where I could not reach out and touch a book, was on the middle of the stairway. Baskets of every shape, age, and color were in the places unoccupied by books and bells.</p>
				<p>One of the tests of a man is whether he knows how to prepare his own food, says Henry. Fire in the fireplace early in the morning, coffee boiled the old New England way on the stove, and a dash of Saturday baked beans greeted me the first morning. I played the Zuni Sunrise Song before Elizabeth was out of bed and, together with the other nine records, it was a source of happiness to the Bestons.</p>
				<p>I had not known that Elizabeth Beston was Elizabeth Coatsworth, the poet. I read a book of her poems while there, and liked especially the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:poem">Song of the Rabbits Outside the Tavern</i>, and the poems about nature. I copied seven of them to read to friends as I travel back to Phoenix, and I know the Old Pioneer will like the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:poem">Green Fields</i>. I was also entranced by the book of Fairy Stories written by Henry thirty years ago. The Bestons, like all farmers, go to bed early, so for once in this last two months, I did get the right amount of sleep.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Yoné</h3>
				<p>Yoné Stafford had come to the Pacifist Conference at Peter Maurin Farm in September, and asked me to stop at her home in Springfield. She has been a friend of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> for years, although not a Catholic. Here I met with a small group of pacifists, four of whom were Catholics. One of them, Mary Moore, has read the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> from the first issue, and formerly taught school near Mott street. Yoné’s house is one of the very few, where I have been, that seems really built to live in. An iron frame, with outlets for the hot air, forms a fireplace. The bricks are built around it. Unlike most fireplaces, it does not smoke. The whole force of an architects office was upset by the idea that a room could be built with a 12-foot wall at a slant, instead of square. This forms a bookshelf, and gives a sense of area to the room, instead of having the walls crowd in on you. The bed here is the best in which I have slept. Yoné opposed the war all during the war, and wrote countless letters to the local press under both her own name and the name “America,” as the characters in Japanese for “Yoné” and for “America” are the same.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Traveling Westward</h3>
				<p>I helped distribute leaflets, with Bob, Mike, and other <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> and War Resister friends, at Times Square, the night of a blackout and display of supposed patriotic efficiency in case of an air raid. Each of us had a different corner. Cops told us to move on, and so we went to another corner. I had about 2,000 leaflets, which I gave out. One fellow argued with the cops and then got arrested for “beating up the cops.” It is not wise to picket or hand out literature if you are going to get hysterical. You have to practice pacifism right then and there.</p>
				<p>Arriving in Rochester <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> after dark, I was met at the bus by Francis Anzilone, and was shown the very clean and orderly <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> house. I knew that their works of mercy had more of the social worker approach, which I had discarded ten years before, and that most of them did not appreciate the pacifist anarchist message of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. However, I was pleased to meet the small group who were interested in my more radical interpretation. Next day, after some stray bus riding and phoning, I met the Thorntons, Vincents, Dvoraks, and Betty Clendenning at Edinboro, <abbr class="postal eoc">Pa.</abbr> Here, different stages of progress in thought and agricultural effort were being worked out. Zigzagging again on buses, I looked in on Mike Strasser’s philosophy class at Duquesne University, in Pittsburgh, and spent the night with his charming family. Erica thought of me as a desert father, I guess, and gave me <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Desert Calling</i> about Charles de Foucauld. I had known Mike in the old Milwaukee <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> days. Despite our respective turns to the right and left, this old <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> bond held us in a brotherly feeling. A conversation on the phone, with <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Hugo and <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Meehan, was the best that I could do in the rush of this Smoky City.</p>
				<p>The next day I phoned the authorities at Chillicothe Prison, and asked permission to visit my <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr> friend Carl Owen. I was no relative, and I was a jailbird, and thus, by the rules, should ordinarily be refused admission. We visited far enough away from an official, who was busy reading incoming mail, so that we could say anything we pleased. Carl was thinner, but clear-eyed. As with all of us in jail, the first few months are the worst, but when we begin to do time we can take it. Carl liked his bacteriological work in the hospital. He did a lot of reading—a chapter from the Bible each day, along with the rest. After nearly two hours, he introduced me to <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Soltis, the Catholic chaplain, who asked about the ideas and activities of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. I had to wait an hour, by the gate, before the officials of the prison made sure that I was properly identified, but finally the electric gate, which decorated the super-electric barbed wire enclosure, opened, and I was on my way. In other years, I had meetings at the home of the young Murrays who had other Catholics present.</p>
				<p>That evening, I had supper with Father John Dunn at the Mercy Hospital, in Portsmouth, Ohio, where he is chaplain. We had been pals in Atlanta, as <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>s in 1918, before he had studied for the priesthood. He had always been bald-headed, so now he looked just a little older, and with that merry twinkle, as of old. I explained the peaceful life of the Hopi to the nuns, and played Hopi records before the evening Benediction. John is the one priest I have heard who said the Rosary and other prayers as if they were a fresh, newly-discovered thought. Each of us remembered names and incidents from Atlanta that the other had forgotten. John had two copies of Douglas Hyde’s <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">I Believed</i>, and gave me one to read on the way. I found it very interesting, and a relief from the stool pigeon mentality of the Budenz-Bentley-Chambers type. Hyde put his anger on no one, and named no names for Scotland Yard to pounce upon.</p>
				<p>My brother Frank has always made money with little effort. He played a violin in the orchestra of the Socialist local in 1917, but since then has always followed the capitalist way of life though with tongue in cheek, for he believes neither in capitalism nor radicalism nor in any religion. He has never voted, not because of anarchist ideas, but because he didn’t think it worthwhile. He had a Stanley Steamer in the old days, and has played around with airplanes for a score of years. He took me up 5,000 feet in the air, and we hovered over Loveland, and tried to guess where grailed the Grail. Then he drove me in his car to see John and Mildred Loomis, who edit the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Interpreter</i>, the decentralist organ which has at times mentioned my anti-tax effort. We ended up at Ernest and Marion Bromley’s in Sharonville. He is leader of the tax-refusers, and Marion quit a good job as secretary to <abbr class="name">A.J.</abbr> Muste, of the <abbr class="initialism">FOR</abbr>, rather than have taxes taken out of her pay for war. They still deduct war taxes in that organization, which is dedicated to peace with a capital “<abbr class="initialism eoc">P.</abbr>” Frank’s wife, Rose, was cordial to me, although not interested in radical ideas.</p>
				<p>At the Grail, I met Helen Adler and Mary Buckley, who greeted me warmly, and I spoke and played Indian records to a small select group until evening when we had supper with Jim and Grace Rogan whom I knew from old <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> days. They were leaving for Africa soon. The founder of the Grail, here, had asked me years ago for carbon copies of all of my notes on Tolstoy. She was now in Africa, and those in charge were fearful of the implications of Tolstoy and Jesus in this mad world. But all of us must go step by step on our own road, at our own speed, and we all do what we want to.</p>
				<p>I visited in Columbus for a few hours with a nephew, whom I had not seen for years. He is manager of a big store, but is interested in this uncle from far away who brought another world, through the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s which I left with him. I spent a week in Cleveland with my mother, who is now 81. I went to the Greek rite church, mornings, in the next block, and with her to her small Baptist church. I read my favorite hymn, <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">Faith of our Fathers</i>. I visited with my nieces and nephews, and five sisters, and brother. “Mamma you are a pipsqueak,” said six year old Gail to my sister Lorraine one morning. Seems she had not been quite asleep the night before, when I was telling my adventures downstairs, and she heard this new word spoken. Dorothy tries to ration me to say “pipsqueak” once a day only, but at times I am sure I exceed my quota. My sister Lola had old letters of mine from prison days packed away, including letters to her from Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman about me. A pleasant visit with Bill and Dorothy Gauchat, of the Cleveland <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, with Max Sandin, <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr> and tax refuser, and, strange as it may seem, a pleasant visit with the Catholic columnist of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Universe Bulletin</i>, who disagrees mightily with Dorothy and myself.</p>
				<p>The kindly atmosphere of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> house in Detroit and the cheerfulness of Lou and Justine Murphy and their happy children is outstanding. These folks are not very radical, and they listened to my extreme message with goodwill. I had breakfast with my old friend of <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr> days, Carl Haessler, and spent the night with Harold Gray on his big farm near Saline. Harold was one of the six of us who had been in jail in World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> and who refused to register in 1942. The cooperative feature of their farm, which appealed in the lean days of the Depression, was now dead, having succumbed to the big wages of the city. But Harold and his wife held forth with their life on the land. This was election night, and we were talking of the Green Revolution, and never tuned in for a minute or thought of the battle between Tweedle Dum and Tweedle Dee. Harold drove me to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> farm at Lyons, where I said hello for a few minutes to the couples living and building there. Then to Ann Arbor, where I looked in the files of the Labadie Collection at the University Library, where all of my writings are filed, each article from the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> being cut out and listed under the heading “Christian Anarchist.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harris is the custodian since the death of Agnes Inglis.</p>
				<p>I had lost track of beautiful Virginia Beck, after knowing her with the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> in Milwaukee and visiting her ten years ago in Denver. On a chance, I wrote to her through her husband, Vincent Smith, who teaches philosophy at Notre Dame. He met me at the bus, and I had a good visit with <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Leo Ward, <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Putz, Julian Pleasants, and others that evening, and a super breakfast-dinner at The House of Bread with Ruth Farney, who had set up the ovens at Peter Maurin Farm. The good spirit of all these folks, who listened to my extreme views of the left, spoke well of the depth of their understanding.</p>
				<p>For the second time in seven years, I phoned the Nuttings and promised, for sure, to see them next year. Later Father Casey loaned me Nutting’s <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Reclamation of Independence</i>, which I read on the train, and enjoyed. Here are a few gems of his:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“A believer in the Green Revolution is simply an anarchist who happens to like farming.”</p>
					<p>“If we are to exalt the common man, the common man who stays common must be the hero⁠—the man who makes his way without unmaking the way of others, who earns his living and that of his family without working for someone else or having someone else work for him; the man who makes use of material things but not of men.”</p>
					<p>“If a man raises wheat to sell, success depends not only or chiefly on the amount of wheat produced, but on the market quotations for wheat. If he raises wheat to feed his family and animals the market price makes no difference whatever. If he has grain he has succeeded.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The next night in Wilmette, I met Dorothy, Monsignor Hillenbrand, and Monsignor Newman at John Mella’s and at Dorothy’s meeting at the school. I had not seen Sharon for over three years. She teaches music at a private school in Winnetka. The cult she belongs to does not damn the Catholic Church, and she told me she was glad I planned to join the Church. She told Dorothy that her cult believed in the Ascension of Mary before the Pope proclaimed it. She is sweetly serene, dedicated, and pure, tolerant, and beautiful. Her cult does not believe in medicine or vaccination, and her boyfriend has withstood the army for a year and a half despite court-martial threats for his refusal to take the shots. I met with several groups in Chicago, and enjoyed the hospitality of Peter Maurin House, which is practically an adjunct of the Alcoholics Anonymous, and not at all radical, although you get a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> there if you ask for it. They have a hard enough time saving themselves from booze, without saving the world. With John Mella and <abbr class="initialism">FOR</abbr> friends, I met Elly Mayr of Vienna, Catholic pacifist daughter of Casper Mayr, leader of Catholic pacifists in Europe. Also, a short visit with Father Teresivich, a gentle and also a radical priest.</p>
				<p>In Milwaukee, I spoke in the Summerfield Methodist Church, where I had given a pacifist sermon from the pulpit at regular services fourteen years before. Al Cortez, an <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr>, was the secretary of the <abbr class="initialism">FOR</abbr>, the first active Spanish rebel I have known. I said hello to my mother-in-law, who was an old-time radical. She is still cordial to me, although she does not like my quitting a good and secure job for labor on farms, and thus decreasing the family income. I met many friends, and got 40 subs for the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. I visited with Henry <abbr class="name">L.</abbr> Nunn, who read to me some pages from his forthcoming <i epub:type="se:name:publication">The Whole Man at Work</i> concerning my activity. Several friends on the Milwaukee <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Journal</i> greeted me kindly, as did dozens of my coworkers of the Department of Public Welfare, whom I had not seen for ten years.</p>
				<p>I stayed overnight with my friend Ray Callahan, first president of the union which I had organized in the office in 1935. He now works at the zoo, and says that he is succeeding with social work among the animals. “I am trying to get the elephant to eat meat and the tiger to eat grass, and I’ll succeed⁠—that is I’ll succeed as quickly as those in the world who try to maneuver folks around in social work,” he said. A meeting with Betty Van Ells, Florence and Jerry of the old <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> group, and kind words from the Cardyn Center, and I was on my way.</p>
				<p>In Minneapolis, on a Sunday morning, waiting for a bus to get to <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Casey, in Hutchinson, I introduced myself at Quaker meeting, and a <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr> who was present, and who had heard me speak at the University in 1938, came forth. He planned a small meeting for that night, and I met many friends, among them <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Mulford Sibley, who had read my book on Christian Anarchism in manuscript seven years before. Someday, I may rewrite it from the Catholic Anarchist view.</p>
				<p>In <a href="chapter-12.xhtml">the next chapter</a>, on my conversion to the Catholic faith, I tell of meeting Dorothy at Father Casey’s and of our visit to old man Marquardt’s at Grasston. “Weep and howl, ye drunkards,” the old man had said to the court, explaining his refusal to register in both wars. He “judged no man,” but stood adamant against the forces of church and state that made war. He made this braggart feel humble in his presence. In 1942, when those of us who were over 45 had to disrupt our lives (and our wives) by refusing to register, the eight Marquardt boys and near relatives who refused to register, and did time in Sandstone, cheered me. The old man had five farms to tend to, with only his wife and daughter to help. He lost two of the farms.</p>
				<p>I had corresponded with David and Beverly White, who teach at Macalester College in <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul, but had never met them. They had some Yogi meeting on that night, so had planned for me to speak at McCosh’s Campus Bookstore, near the <abbr class="initialism">U.</abbr> of Minnesota campus in Minneapolis. Beverley drove me there. Two of the Marquardt boys greeted me happily, and the older one stayed until 1:30 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> when the meeting broke up. Here in this radical and non-religious bookstore, I was pleased to find <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s on display, with a tin can to put the pennies in as they were purchased. Every variety of radical was present, and there must have been someone with a knowledge of Catholic history, for the <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul daily paper, under the caption “They Say,” had a picture of Pope Pius <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span> and myself (to the left).</p>
				<p>It quoted the Pope: “The church is realistic. It believes in peace. It reminds statesmen that the most complicated political situations can be solved on a friendly basis.” Then they quoted my Love, Courage, and Wisdom phrase⁠—<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#OneInAMillion">see Chapter 6</a>. At the end it said “Ammon Hennacy, Roman Catholic ‘Anarchist.’ ”</p>
				<p>In Madison, I had the best meeting of my trip, at <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s church, near the campus of the University of Wisconsin. Father Kutchera had prepared the way at mass that morning by announcing the meeting, and saying that Catholics were directed from the Pope on faith and morals, and on charity above all, but otherwise they could be as radical or conservative as they chose. Fourteen years before, I had spent the night with Father Kutchera, and we had discussed Tolstoy until early morning. I had been advertised, then, to debate with the head of the <abbr class="initialism">ROTC</abbr> at the Student Union. At the last minute, the military authorities had forbidden an officer to debate with a pacifist, so I had the meeting to myself.</p>
				<p>I had many questions from the floor this night, and many of us adjourned to Father Kutchera’s study until midnight. My old-time Quaker friend, Francis Hole, was out of town, so I enjoyed the hospitality of John McGrath, circulation manager of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">The Progressive</i>, and long-time admirer of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. The following night, some Quakers and pacifists, and Father Kutchera, met with me at John’s. I also spoke to a group of students at the University Baptist center, where my old friend Shorty Collins held forth. I had him speak in Waukesha, in 1929, on “Stop the Next War Now.” I was glad to meet Ivan Bean, who with Bill Ryan and myself were the three non-registrants in Wisconsin in 1942.</p>
				<p>My old-time friend Francis Gorgen now lived in his home town of Mineral Point, Wisconsin. He came to get me, to spend Thanksgiving.</p>
				<p>Real tax refusers are difficult to find, so I couldn’t miss Walter Gormly, whose car had been taken by the tax man a year ago. He met me at Cedar Rapids in a car not registered in his name, and we had a pleasant evening, along with a professor at nearby Cornell College who was interested in my anarchist ideas especially. I promised to speak to his class next year. Walter is a technician and an expert on efficiency for small business. He had done time in Sandstone, after quitting a good job because of the war work in the plant where he was employed.</p>
				<p>Dave Dunn and Mignon McMenamy met me at the bus in <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis, and I spent several days in and around the Pio Decimo press. I especially enjoyed the sung mass at Monsignor Hellriegel’s Holy Cross Church, and his robust faith and energy. We drove out to see Cy Echele and family, and met with Quakers and young Catholics interested in the more radical <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> program. Father Joseph Becker, at <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis University, introduced me to his class, which was studying unemployment. I stressed the fact that there was no unemployment on the land. He read some of Peter’s essays, and we all discussed the anarchistic implications of the Green Revolution. A very fine man, indeed, was Father Becker. Before I had joined the Church, I had often used the word “Jesuit” in the Protestant connotation, which meant “double talk,” but now Father Becker, and my memories of Father George Dunne in Phoenix, gave the word “Jesuit” a new meaning.</p>
				<p>Larry Heaney had been my especial good friend in the Milwaukee <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, so I was pleased to meet Ruth Ann Heaney and her children. Two of them resembled Larry. Marty Paul had met me at the train. We went over rough roads until we reached the farm. Here I felt at home, among the oil lamps and wood stoves, and cold bedroom upstairs. Marty had worked hard, with very little result, until now he begins to see growth. Their four children danced around, bashful and happy. Jack and Frances Woltjen came over the next morning and, after a pleasant visit by Ruth Ann’s fireplace, they drove me to the bus. We all talked theories, but we also knew something of hard work⁠—and the loneliness that goes with detachment on the land.</p>
				<p>It was nearly a twenty-four hour ride on the bus to Denver. I sat next to a boy who was going to work at the atom bomb plant in Washington. He had graduated from high school, and looked hopelessly upon a possible army life. He offered no patriotic comments as I gave my conscientious objector history, read a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> that I gave him, but was bound to follow the line of least resistance. In Denver I was glad to stay at the home of a lady who puts <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s in the book rack at her church: <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Kennebeck is a <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> fan, and the mother-in-law of my old friend Elliot Wager, who says that my debunking of everything in the world, except the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, at an anti-war meeting of Wheeler, in Milwaukee in 1941, gave him the push which ended up in his joining the Church. I had not met him since then. Two Jesuit priests and other young Catholics came, one evening, to the most enthusiastic of small meetings of my trip. I had spent four days in jail in Denver in 1942 for selling the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> on the streets, but despite the superpatriotic atmosphere of secular and ecclesiastical Denver, I feel that there is a real basis for a <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> house there. Helen Ford and Mildred Mowe, of the <abbr class="initialism">FOR</abbr> left, welcomed me. I had never met Paul Kermeit, who had done time as a <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>, and was happy to meet him here at their evening meeting.</p>
				<p>In Albuquerque, my friend Monsignor Garcia welcomed me, although he disagrees entirely with my ideas and with <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> radicalism. An evening with Al Reser and Bob and Betty Reagan was the extent of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> interest in this community. Al and Catherine had bought a house west of town. I had hoped that they would get as far as Phoenix. My good friend <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Soker, of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Lutheran Church, was called out of town the night before I arrived. I was pleased to see a sign, “open for prayer,” on his church door. I visited employers with whom I had worked during my five years here, and walking the six miles out in the country after mass, early one morning, I did not at first recognize Lipa and Ernesto, about whom I had written in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> in 1945. Pickets walked in front of the chain stores as they did in Denver. I had only a few <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s left, but encouraged the pickets and gave them <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s. I spoke to Brother Mathias at his clean and orderly House of Hospitality, where the atmosphere is that of social work, and not radical like the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. Father Schall was not home when I went to Isleta Pueblo. I visited old friends among the Indians there. They liked my report of the Hopi. I spoke with a leader of the Jemez Indians who came to see Monsignor Garcia. He was Catholic, and appreciated the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> which I gave him.</p>
				<p>I met my daughter Carmen in Santa Fe. She met me at the bus, as did also some friends with whom I had corresponded for years, but had not met: Peter and Florence van Dresser. Carmen teaches music here at the home of that cult to which she and Sharon and Selma belong. I had an extra fine vegetarian supper with her and the cult friends where she rooms. She is of a more demure type than her individualistic sister, but despite the years of separation, she was kind and sweet to me, and she lives the same dedicated life as does Sharon, and is gracious and beautiful. A boy in this home had refused to do any work for his employer on a job at Los Alamos, so had lost his job. Carmen looked through my missal and knew the Kyrie, Gloria, <abbr>etc.</abbr> from her musical studies. She also was sympathetic to my becoming a Catholic, as there was no chance of my belonging to her cult.</p>
				<p>I spoke to a group of Quakers, <abbr class="initialism">FOR</abbr> members, and Catholics in the home of the grey uniformed nuns, medical missionaries next door to the house where Carmen rooms. This order has hospitals in India, and here in Santa Fe and Augusta, <abbr class="postal eoc">Ga.</abbr> They perform maternity services on call, as these two areas have the greatest infant mortality in the country. Dorothy had spoken here six years ago, and I was welcomed by the intelligent nuns, who did not let their interest in their immediate problem keep them from seeking to understand the wider Christian Anarchist view of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, which I presented.</p>
				<p><em>“Scabbing on the system,”</em> said my friend Peter van Dresser, as he pointed to the stone battlements built to hold his wind power generator. We had driven up from Santa Fe the sixty miles north to this beautiful 50 acres, stretching in narrow strips at the base of orange cliffs, through which ran a small mountain stream. Half of this acreage had been cultivated for many years. A road wound up from the village three miles away, and on toward the nearest neighbor, twelve miles distant. Peter and Florence had sought for months for just such a place, and in despair had driven west toward California. On the way they had come across this Shangri La, and had bought it from Mexicans living there. The adobe house was falling apart, and now this new one was being built. Peter is one of the expert decentralists of this country: a house builder, and one of the few people I have met whose radicalism extends over into definite action. In this Land of the Sun, the house will be heated by solar heat. Peter is a designer and builder of machines also. The workshop, which will come next, along with the food grown in this sheltered mountain retreat, will prove that no one has to live in a town and be a slave to a boss, but that everyone can be self-sufficient. Sun, shade, water, earth, mighty cliffs, and not far away the magnificent Sangre de Christo (Blood of Christ) Mountains. Eleven-year-old Steve had helped his parents make a relief map of the immediate country and recently, before the first deep snow had come, he hiked one afternoon by himself over a rough snake mountain with pack, lunch, and compass.</p>
				<p>On the way from Santa Fe, we had stopped a few hours for a visit with Father Cassady, at Espanola. He is one of the few priests in this state who appreciates the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. Peter and Florence are not members of any church, and were enthused to find a man of the cloth who had been raised in this vicinity, knew its problems, and understood Eric Gill and the decentralist problem.</p>
				<p>It was after dark as we came back through Espanola, and thus we were able to see the cold and formal lines of the lights at the atom bomb plant at Los Alamos. This was a great contrast to the varied sprinkle of lights, here and there in the valley, coming from the homes of humble people. The story goes around, here, that an old man had a school where he sought to develop the mind and spirit of students, and that when the government confiscated it and built the greatest force of destruction known to man on his beloved mesa, he died within a few months. (I was to meet the daughter of the founder of this school, Peggy Pond Church, in a few months in Phoenix. The old man from whom the government took the school had owned it since the death of Peggy’s father some years ago. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pond had established a school in the lowlands to the east, and had been flooded out, so thought this mesa would never be flooded. A flood of hate, however, reached up, and now envelopes the mesa.) Mammon is not satisfied with sending the murderous product of Los Alamos abroad, but in order to make the slaves employed in this devil’s work contented, the manure from countless small farms has been bought up to make the grass grow an unnatural green on this murderous mesa. A social worker told me that an excessive number of maladjusted children live in Los Alamos.</p>
				<p>In Flagstaff, my good friend, Piatt Cline, met me at the bus. He had just returned from Hotevilla, where he had learned of the death of Fred, one of the Hopi conscientious objectors who spent four years in prison. Fred had been injured when a bus overturned. Piatt has a tape recorder, and I was pleased to listen to the words of Andrew, as interpreted, telling of the Hopi traditions. Piatt caught me unawares and recorded my picketing experiences as I was talking. He was interested in my reasons for becoming a Catholic, and just why I joined the Church, so this was also recorded.</p>
				<p>The papers recently carried a story about the Civil Air Patrol seeking to build up an excuse for their existence by planning to drop Christmas presents to the Navajo and Hopi Indians. The true Hopi announced that they did not want presents through this antisocial channel. The Hopi work hard, and they are poor, but they want little to do with the white man and his Coca-Cola culture … A visit to the American Friends Service Committee local office with their hazy goodwill activities, the other extreme from the airplane Santa Claus, completed my visit in Flagstaff.</p>
				<p>Arriving in Phoenix, after four months and four days abroad, I found it raining, and within a few days was irrigating and working as usual.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
