<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter18" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 18</h2>
                                <h3>Book Reviews</h3>
				<h3>1950⁠–⁠1960</h3>
			</header>
			<p>Inasmuch as I have gained insight from others, a short summary of the most important book reviews I have written for the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and in the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> paper <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Industrial Worker</i> is given.
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Hopi Way</i> by Laura Thompson, and <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Culture in Crisis, a study of the Hopi Indians</i>, former <abbr class="initialism">U.</abbr> of Chicago Press, and latter by Harpers.</p>
                                <p>The thesis of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Culture in Crisis</i> is that the influence of missionaries, especially Mennonite, has broken down traditional religious beliefs of the Hopi in the villages of New Oraibi, Upper Moencopi, and Bacobi. And also that the coercive measures of the government have produced “rigidity and ultra-conservatism” in the outstanding rebel village of Hotevilla and in a lesser extent in Shongopovi. As the white man’s world crumbles, the Hopi are shown to have a world outlook, a faith, a Way of Life more satisfying and wholesome than that of the ancient Greek city-states or of any modern Utopia. Will the Indian Bureau succeed in demoralizing the Hopi? Will the missionaries, the army, and the cattle and oil men succeed in getting the souls and bodies of the Hopi? The author says that “The Navajo-Hopi land dispute was not legally settled until 1943, when the Navajo were confirmed in the use of three-quarters of the original Hopi reservation which they had upsurged and were occupying, leaving the Hopi the use of only 986 square miles of desert land.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Bending Cross, a biography of Eugene Victor Debs</i>, by Ray Ginger, Rutgers <abbr>Univ.</abbr> Press, New Brunswick, <abbr class="postal">N.J.</abr>, 1949.</p>
                        <p>Born in a Catholic family, he was not baptized and seldom entered a church, but he was a better follower of Christ as far as I knew than any so-called Christian leader of his time. Even in the 90s he refused to speak before a segregated audience. He was not a pacifist, nor an anarchist, but when Emma Goldman, the anarchist said, “Mr. Debs, you’re an anarchist.” Debs clasped her hand and said, “Not Mister, but Comrade, won’t you call me that?” He said that “The capitalist politician tells you how intelligent you are, to keep you ignorant. I tell you how ignorant you are to make you desire to be intelligent.” His speech to the court in 1918 in Cleveland is a classic. He boldly gave the revolutionary position and got his ten years in Atlanta. Here he was beloved by all prisoners, and refusing to go to compulsory chapel, the warden abolished compulsion for all. In his early days when he was ordered by a group of thugs out of Colorado, he said, “This will either be the beginning of organized labor in Colorado or the end of me.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Autobiography of Mother Jones</i>, Mary Field Parton, Charles <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Kerr <abbr>Co.</abbr>, Chicago, 1925. Reviewed in <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 21, 1951 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Industrial Worker</i>.</p>
				<p>“There’s only one thing to be afraid of … not being a man.” This was the characteristic brave answer of Mother Jones in 1919, at the age of 89, during the steel strike when a union official felt it might compromise their fight to allow a Communist to put out leaflets in the union hall lauding Russian revolt. She was born in County Cork of a family of fighters against British terrorism, she taught in a parochial school in Monroe, <abbr class="postal">Mich.</abbr>, had a dressmaking shop for the rich until burned out by the Chicago Fire of 1871. She then became an organizer for the United Mine Workers until her death at the age of 100. She led hundreds of the wives of miners, armed with mops and brooms and banging on dishpans, to the mine pits, straight up to the machine guns of the Colorado thugs. On elections she said, “You don’t need to vote to raise hell … you need convictions and a voice.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Life of Mahatma Gandhi</i> by Louis Fischer. Harpers, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr>, 1950. $5.00</p>
				<p>In dealing with the enemy it was Good will to the enemy that Gandhi always had. Fischer said that “Victory came [in South Africa] to Gandhi not when Smuts had no more strength to fight him but when he had no more heart to fight him.” Gandhi’s idea of fasting is little-understood in the West. Fischer quotes him as saying: “One may fast against those who love you, not against a tyrant.” Gandhi said, “We must widen the prison gates … Freedom is to be wooed only inside prison walls and sometimes on gallows, never in the council chambers, courts, or the schoolroom.” Fischer contrasts Churchill and Gandhi: “Churchill is the Byronic Napoleon. Political power is poetry to him. Gandhi was the sober saint to whom such power was anathema. The British aristocrat and the brown plebian were both conservative, but Gandhi was a nonconformist conservative. As he grew older Churchill became more Tory, Gandhi more revolutionary. Churchill loved social traditions. Gandhi smashed social barriers. Churchill mixed with every class, but lived in own. Gandhi lived with everybody. To Gandhi, the lowliest Indian was a child of God. To Churchill, all Indians were the pedestal for a throne. He would have died to keep England free, but tried to destroy those who wanted India free.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Pictorial History of the American Indian</i>, by Oliver LaFarge, Crown Publication, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr>, 1957.</p>
                        <p>This book accomplishes the difficult feat of interspersing 350 illustrations of American Indians with their historical perspectve and debunkng much of the fiction in our history books, so that it ought to be required reading in every high school in the country. The map giving the ancient location of over 200 tribes ought to help put the white man in his place geographically, while the details of the government’s deceit ought to put us in our place ethically. Indians lived in New Mexico 20,000 years ago and for 3,000 years grew corn. The way the white man got the land of the Indian was, “get him drunk, talk him into signing a mortgage he cannot pay off, does not understand that he must pay off, and in due course foreclosure… that is the system.” “Many missionaries think that a man cannot become a good Christian unless he dresses as the missionary does, lives in the same kind of a house, eats the same food—despite the fact that, as Indians sometimes point out, Our Lord wore His hair long and wrapped Himself in something very like a blanket. The same line of thinking led well meaning schoolteachers on the Navajo reservation to propagandize their pupils urgently against eating the ‘disgusting’ parts of a sheep, until a study by the Association on American Indian Affairs showed that only by eating the whole animal could the Indians achieve a balanced diet, and that those who followed the teachers advice were more susceptible to tuberculosis than those who did not.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Cherokee</i>, by Don Tracy, Dial, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr>, 1957.</p>
                        <p>True to the history of Tsali, who by his bravery in refusing with his band of mountain Cherokees to accept the white man’s false promise of freedom in Indian Territory, and by his voluntary death at the hand of the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Army, was able to purchase the freedom of the remnant of his people, this thrilling story gives the customs and traits of this noblest of eastern Indians. The love story of Suti, the boy who killed two panthers with his blowgun and darts, and of Meg, the daughter of freedom-loving pioneers, is more gripping than most of the romances of modern whites.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Royal City</i>, by Les Savage, <abbr>Jr.</abbr>, Hanover House, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr>, 1956.</p>
                        <p>This book tells vividly of the rebellion of 1680 led by Po-pe, esthetic cacique whom power led into a gluttonous life and deserved death when he visited Acoma. In a natural consequence of character and historical events the author gives a thrilling story of Luis, the young American-born Spaniard, who tried to get justice for the Indians whom the greedy zealots of the Inquisition robbed for their own profit and that of wealthy Spanish nobles. He tells of the relation of Luis and his relation with three women: Condesa, the courtesan, Kashana, the Acoma maiden, and Barbara, the Spanish aristocrat whose love for the wholesome desert country around Santa Fe ennobled her life more and more as she saw through the wickedness of her aristocratic surroundings. The contrast of the corruption and intrigue of Mexico City with the simplicity and integrity of the Acoma cacique who fasted in nakedness for the sins of the whole tribe; the sunrise and sunset of the Sangre de Christo (Blood of Christ) Mountains near Santa Fe; the smell of the mesquite burning from countless fireplaces in the morning air—all this to those of us who have lived with and known the Pueblo Indians and have loved their “way of life,” makes this book one to be enjoyed and remembered.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Hopi Indian</i>, by Harry <abbr class="name">C.</abbr> james, Caxton Press, Caldwell, Idaho, 1956.</p>
                        <p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> James knows much about the Hopi from scores of years spent near them. He tells of the beating to death of the Hopi Juan Cuno of Oraibi in 1655 by Friar de Guerra. He says that “the best of the Hopi have no desire to lead the easy, parasitical life of the rationed, clothed, housed, and protected ‘ward’.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">America’s Concentration Camps</i>, by Carlos <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> Embry, David McKay <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr>, 1956.</p>
                        <p>The author is a liberal southern editor who sympathizes with the Indians but would solve their problems by assimilating them into white society. Until 1834 an American citizen had to have a passport to enter Indian territory. And the Red-Cloud Treaty was the only one ever made by the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> where the enemy received all its demands.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Conquest of Violence: The Gandhian Philosophy of Conflict</i>, by <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Joan <abbr class="name">V.</abbr> Boudurant, Princeton University Press, 1958.</p>
                        <p>“Oppression Ceases,” Gandhi taught his followers, “when people cease to fear the bayonet.” Unlike regular anarchists Gandhi sought by negotiation with politicians to achieve the stateless anarchist ideal, and also unlike most anarchists he was able to develop both personal and mass resistance to the state and to exploitation and to overcome the government. The author quotes Bob Ludlow in an article in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> as saying, “It is the political element that will destroy Gandhi’s teachings in India for he did not realize that Satyagraha must be united with an anti-state philosophy.” The author replies, “nevertheless with Satyagraha as the functioning socio-political technique of action, anarchism could conceivably result.” Gandhi said, quoting from the Gita that “when there is no desire for fruit, there is no temptation for untruth.” Gandhi says, “Do not resist arrest; if taken prisoner, behave in an exemplary manner… do not expect guarantees for maintenance of dependents.” Courtesy to the opponent was shown in India when “Satyagrahis ceased their civil disobedience at midday because of the hardship this would work on European opponents who were less accustomed to extreme heat… and postponing an action to spare the Englishman for his Easter Sunday services and celebration.” The author quotes Gandhi as saying, “I do believe that when there is only a choice between cowardice and violence, I would advise violence… Non-violent conduct is never demoralizing whereas cowardice always is.” Fasting is primarily a penance and according to Gandhi “there can be no penance where the accused person is not conscious of having committed a wrong… Fasting… no one who has not earned the right to do so should use this weapon.” The author shows an understanding of anarchism when she says, “Anarchists urge freedom from politics rather than political freedom.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The True Believer</i>, by Eric Hoffer, Harper, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr>, 1951.</p>
                        <p>“Who is the true-believer?… He’s a guilt-ridden hitchhiker who thumbs a ride on every cause from Christianity to Communism… When we renounce self and become part of a compact whole, we not only renounce personal advantage but are also rid of our personal responsibility.” I read and reread this thought-provoking and cynical book. Most of what he says is true for nearly every “true believer” you meet, but it is not necessarily true of all, and these few like Debs, Tolstoy, Gandhi, <abbr>etc.</abbr> who acted and whose truth somehow diffused itself in the hearts of people rather than to be organized into corruption. To cast his incomplete self on the bandwagon after the after pioneers have blazed the trail; to take benefits of the union scale of wages after having scabbed in thought or deed for years; by the impact of his numbers to water down the purity of any cause. “The mass leader: this strength lies in his blind spots and in plugging all outlets but one.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Autobiography of Big Bill Haywood</i> (reprint from 1929) International Publishers, 381 Fourth Avenue, New York City, 1958.</p>
                        <p>In the face of a 20-year prison sentence, Haywood was asked in court if he was conspiring to interfere with the profits of the munition makers. He answered, “We are conspiring to prevent the making of profits on labor in any industry. We are conspiring against the dividend makers. We are conspiring against rent and interest. We want to establish a new society where people can live without profit, without dividends, without rent and without interest if it is possible—and it is possble—if people will live normally, live like human beings should live. I would say that if that is a conspiracy we are conspiring.” Wonderful words! An old “Molly Maguire” taught him unionism when he was working in the mines in Nevada as a boy. He helped found the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> whose slogan was, “overtime is scab time, any time there are some working no time.” He was born in Salt Lake City. He married Nevada Jane Minor and delivered the baby himself on a lonesome ranch. He attended two terms in a parochial school in Salt Lake City and knew Father Hagerty, who it is said wrote the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> preamble. Through the famous Moyer, Haywood, and Pettibone trial when the stool pigeon Harry Orchard perjured himself and Darrow finally won the case, and through the days of 1917 when hundreds of <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr>’s were in jail against the war Haywood stood firm. The <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> was the only union that had the rule that “any one who joined the army, the militia, or the police was forever denied membership.” Haywood was a lover of centralized power in administering the <abbr class="initialism eoc">I.W.W.</abbr> Many of this union became Communists and went to Russia. I disagree emphatically with his skipping bail and going to Russia, but I tend to remember his good fiight up to that time rather than to castigate him. His wife died in 1917 and his two daughters also passed away before Haywood died of diabetes in Moscow, May 18, 1928.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Attorney For The Damned</i>, by Clarence Darrow, Edited by Arthur Weinberg. Simon and Shuster, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr>, 1957.</p>
                        <p>This is a lengthy book which gives excerpts from some of the greatest summations which Darrow gave over the years, but one would have to feel the tone, see the light in his eyes, and observe the swing from nonchalant humor to heart-rending emotion to know how he swayed juries and never lost a case. His summations lasted at times for three days with never the use of a note. In 1894, when he was general attorney for the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad, and Debs with his American Railway Union had a strike on the line, Darrow resigned his good job and represented Debs. He is known for his speech to the prisoners of Cook County jail:</p>
                        <blockquote><p>Preachers will tell you that you should be good then you will get rich and be happy. Of course we know that people do not get rich by being good, and that is the reason why so many of you people try to get rich some other way, only you do not understand how to do it quite as well as the fellow outside.</p></blockquote>
                        <p>And again Darrow said, “If a doctor were called upon to treat typhoid fever he would probably try to find out what kind of milk or water the patient drank, and perhaps clean out the well so that no one else could get typhoid from the same source. But if a lawyer was called upon, he would give him thirty days in jail, and then he would think that nobody else would ever dare to take it (that is the typhoid fever). If the patient got well in 15 days, he would be kept until his time was up; if the disease was worse at the end of 30 days, the patient would be released because his time was out.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Anarchism</i> by Paul Eltzbacher, Libertarian Book Club, <abbr class="initialism">GPO</abbr> Box 842, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1.</p>
                        <p>This book is mentioned by Kropotkin in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Encyclopedia Brittanica</i> as the best book on anarchism, and Alexander Berkman told me in Atlanta prison that this was the one book I should read. The author analyzes Godwin, Proudhon, Stirner, Bakunin, Kropotkin, Tucker, and Tolstoy as to law, the state and property and as to means of achieving the revolution. I agree with Tolstoy in critical idealistic anarchism, no law in the future, no legal relation, and pacifism. I agree with Godwin in no law in the future and no legal relation. I agree with Tucker in pacifism. I agree with Bakunin in having both individual and collective property. I agree with Proudhon in critical idealistic anarchism. There is also an article by Rudolph Rocker on anarchist communes in Spain and other of his ideas. This book as a guide to the anarchist writings is invaluable, for anarchism remains, if taken with the pacifist approach, as the only hope, for all other roads lead to tyranny and death.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Anarchism</i>, by George Woodcock, World <abbr>Co.</abbr>, 2231 <abbr class="compass">W.</abbr> 110 <abbr>St.</abbr>, Cleveland, Ohio, 1962. $1.95 paperback.</p>
                        <p>“Anarchism has thriven best in the lands of the sun, where it is easy to dream of golden ages of ease and simplicity, yet where the clear light also brightens the shadows of existing misery.”</p>
                        <p>“Two recent historians of anarchism, Alain Heslier and Claude Harmel, have discovered the first anarchist in Jean Meslier, the 18th century cure of Etrepigny, whose resentment against the ecclesiastical and civil authorities of his time festered into a great Testament which he left to his rural parishioners (it was intercepted after his death by the Church authorities and never reached the farmers for whom it was meant) and in which he denounced authority of every kind and advocated a bucolic society based on friendship among peasant communities.”</p>
                        <p>And Jacques Roux, a country priest, in 1790 led a group called the Enrages, said that land belonged to all equally, and burned chateaux. He was sentenced to death by a revolutionary tribunal, but he cheated the guillotine by killing himself, saying, “to die placing liberty above law is the death of an anarchist.”</p>
                        <p>“In Italy on Aug. 1, 1877, Father Fortini, the priest of Letino, welcomed the anarchists as ‘true apostles sent by the Lord to preach His divine law’… Guided by Father Fortini, the anarchist band set off for the next village of Gallo, where Father Tamburini came out to welcome them, and went from house to house, shouting to the people, ‘fear nothing. They are honest folk.’”</p>
                        <p>Tolstoy said that “the man who wishes to abolish the state must cease to co-operate with it, refuse military service, police service, jury service, the payment of taxes.” “Perhaps the most impressive example of Tolstoyan influence in the contemporary Western world is—ironically in view of Tolstoy’s distrust of organized churches—the Roman Catholic group associated in the United States with the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Catholic Worker</i> and particularly with that saintly representative of Christian Anarchism, Dorothy Day.”</p>
                        <p>In Spain Pi Y Margall, a Catalonian bank clerk, was the first active anarchist. Pio Baroja, the author of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Red Dawn</i>, was a great anarchist writer. “The Inquisition effectively stifled any tendency toward religious dissent during the 16th century, anarchism has in fact taken on the character ofa delayed Reformation movement.… All anarchism, has of course, a moral-religious element which distinguishes it from ordinary political movements, but this element is far more developed in Spain than elsewhere… for in the eyes of the Spanish libertarians the Catholic Church occupies the position of anti-Christ in the Christian world… <em>the anger of an intensely religious people who feel they have been deserted and deceived</em>.”</p>
                        <p>The conclusion of the author is well stated: “The great anarchists call on us to stand on our own moral feet like a generation of princes, to become aware of justice as an inner fire, and to learn that the still, small voices of our own hearts speak more truly than the choruses of propaganda that daily assault our outer ears. ‘Look into the depths of your own beings.’ In this insistence that freedom and moral self-realization are interdependent, and one cannot live without the other, lies the ultimate lesson of true anarchism.”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
