<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter12" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 12</h2>
				<h3>I Become a Catholic</h3>
				<h3>September 21⁠–⁠November 17, 1952</h3>
				<h4>Maryfarm⁠–⁠Chrystie Street⁠–⁠Peter Maurin Farm⁠–⁠Hutchinson, Minnesota</h4>
			</header>
			<p>“When will Ammon join the Church?” asked a friend, of Father George Dunne.</p>
			<p>“When it gets underground, I suppose,” he answered.</p>
			<p>I felt that, in ten years or more, the capitalist or the Communist dictatorship might have all of us radicals in jail, and then would be time enough for joining a church. I had always said that a priest or preacher who blest war could not bless me.</p>
			<p>When picketing, that Wednesday in August of 1950, I had momentarily felt drawn to the Church. Also, for a moment, at <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Casey’s retreat at Maryfarm, in August of 1952, I felt that there might be something inside the Church that I ought to have, but that was only for a second, and I thought of it no more. I attended mass daily after that retreat, because I was at the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, and loved them all. So when Bob Ludlow went to Uniate mass at the Ukranian church, each morning I got up early, and went with him. If I was at Peter Maurin Farm, I went to mass there. I did not understand much of it, and it did not mean much to me. I was busy writing on this book, speaking to all kinds of radicals, and answering letters that came to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. Father Casey had left for Minnesota, and I was glad to have met him. I told him that if I ever joined the Church, he would be the one to baptize me, but I felt no reason to even think of joining it now. Dorothy had said not to join the Church because I loved her and the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, so if, in addition, I loved <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Casey, the first anarchist priest I had met, this only meant that I had fine radical friends who were Catholic. The Church which upheld the rich landlords in every country when it was in the majority, and who still blessed Franco and Peron, and still blest war⁠—that was the Church that people thought of when the name Catholic was mentioned, and not the Catholic Worker.</p>
			<p>It was Saturday, the 20th of September, when Dorothy mentioned that she had to talk to a Communion Breakfast at the Hotel Biltmore the next morning, to 600 employees of Gimbels. I knew what these confabs consisted of: they all got together and said, “God, Jesus, Gimbels! God, Jesus, Gimbels!” Pretty soon they were saying, “Gimbels, Jesus, God”, and finally ending up with only word, “Gimbels.” It was the old Pie in the Sky racket. As the old <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> song went:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Long haired preachers come out every night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Try to tell you what’s wrong and what’s right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when asked how ’bout something to eat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They will answer in voices so sweet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You will eat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bye and Bye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that beautiful land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the Sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Work and Pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Live on hay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You’ll get pie in the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When you die.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Around 9 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr>, I was typing in the office, when Dorothy stopped on her way to the church. She said she did not know what to say to such a crowd, so she would have to pray about it and ask for guidance. She came back in a couple of hours.</p>
			<p>We all wished her good luck as she went (as the saying was) into the jaws of the lion next morning. In the afternoon, Tom was called to the phone, and received the message that I was to accompany Florence Quinn, who did secretarial work for Dorothy at times, and who had questioned me about “Rendering unto Caesar” at my first talk at the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, to some free opera down in the village. Dorothy had mentioned about going there, and I told her I didn’t care about such things. Florence had tried to get reserve seats, but only got a number to call to wait in line. I thought that as long as I was there, I might as well stay, for we could just as easily get three seats as two. While we were talking about it, Dorothy came up. She had been to see her sister Delia after the talk at the Hotel Biltmore. She described how the big shots from the store and the chancery office breathed hard when she commenced her voluntary poverty, reliance upon God rather than insurance companies and capitalist effort, nonpayment of taxes for war and Atom Bombs, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> She described going to mass in the big Church nearby, and that right after Communion, without any reason or warning, the big organ burst forth with the blasphemy of the Star Spangled Banner. This was a most holy moment after partaking of the body of Christ, and it was broken up by this warmongering. Everyone stood up in honor of this God of Battles. Dorothy did that thing which only <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis or Gandhi would have had the spiritual insight to do: <em>she knelt and prayed.</em></p>
			<p>Hearing her tell of this gave me the one positive jolt of my life since I knew in solitary in Atlanta that I loved my enemy, the warden. Here was I, brave and boastful about my great One Man Revolution. I had faced the taunts of crowds and of the police, had felt nearly alone in opposing the draft in two wars. I was making a good fight. I remembered right then of my debate with the head of the American Legion in Milwaukee, Sam Corr, at the Grand Avenue Congregational Church in 1941, before Pearl Harbor. The flustered assistant minister stood between Sam and me, on the platform before the crowd, saying, “Now what song will we sing? Oh, <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">Onward Christian Soldiers</i>, with your permission <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy.” “You fellows can sing it. I won’t,” I replied. Accordingly, I sat stubbornly in front of them all while they stood and sang. I felt mean, and I expect I looked mean. And they glowered at me. I was the first to speak. I said, “I suppose you folks will wonder why I did not have the courtesy to arise and sing with you. I wouldn’t sing such a song in prison, and stood the chance of going to solitary many times. One young fellow walked out of prison chapel when they sang it, and did a month in solitary. So I’ll be damned if I’ll stand up for such a warmongering song on the outside.” The next day the Milwaukee <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Journal</i> commented on my stubbornness.</p>
			<p>Now all this came back to me. I called myself a non-church Christian. I was just a stubborn smart-alec⁠—perhaps with more knowledge than many others I met, but still moving along with a handicap of lack of spirituality. Now I knew my lack of it. How was I going to get it, and where? I did not dare admit to myself out loud that I was slipping, but I did say then with tears in my eyes to Dorothy, “You have shown me a great light. You have made me ashamed of myself. This is the biggest jolt that I have received in my life. Where it will lead I don’t know, but from now on life is going to be different for me.”</p>
			<p>That next week was full of meetings. One night, Dorothy and I had planned to visit a certain Communist whom I had known 30 years before, but it rained very hard, and we did not go. Saturday, we called up and invited this Communist and family over to Peter Maurin Farm for the Sunday afternoon. That morning, we went down to the old church near Tamar Hennessy’s, where they go to mass. The old priest had set aside a plot where Peter Maurin’s body could be moved from faraway Brooklyn to be near the farm named in his honor. I had promised to clean weeds off the plot, but this had already been done by a caretaker. So Dorothy, Tamar, and I carried rocks, and made the boundaries of the plot.</p>
			<p>Around 1 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr>, the Communist, and his wife and teenagers, came. We all went upstairs, above the chapel, to the library, where there is a loom and spinning wheel. We all teased, and carded, and spun, and rewound wool. The oldest teenager asked me to explain anarchism. I did so. For several hours we all discussed Communism, anarchism, pacifism, war, capitalism, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> We were just as far apart as people could be. Communist-atheist and Catholic-pacifist-anarchist. Yet all that time there was not one harsh word, or loud voice, or intemperate bit of speech. We did not agree, but there was that spirit of brotherhood which ought to be over the whole world. There was that thing that the Catholics call Grace. There was that thing which we, of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, called The Green Revolution.</p>
			<p>For supper, we had homemade baked beans and all the homemade whole wheat bread we could eat⁠—with a few loaves wrapped up for the Communists to take home. The Communists had recorders with them, and they played all kinds of folk and popular songs. Without anyone requesting or suggesting it, they commenced to play Christmas carols. None of us remembered to play The Red Flag. As they left, the teenager said, “Ammon, I want to thank you for explaining anarchism to me.” Now I’ll swear that, among all the radicals and pacifists, and even Catholic Workers, I never met up with such good manners as this.</p>
			<p>Dorothy took them down to the bus. I looked around for something to read, and saw a book on the table, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">An Anthology of Russian Short Stories</i>, and of course looked up the one by Tolstoy. It was one I had never read: <i epub:type="se:name:publication:short-story">The Diary of an Insane Man</i>. I have not seen it since, and my memory of it might not be accurate, but the impression I received was that this man said that, when he was a boy, he had not hit back when another boy had hit him, and people had called him foolish or crazy. Then again, when he had grown up and the peasants had stolen wood from his forest, he had not done like others and taken them to court, but had said nothing about it. This was also foolish and crazy. And now, yesterday, he had sold all he had and given to the poor, and had been committed to the insane asylum. How Tolstoyan!</p>
			<p>Dorothy went upstairs at once, to read and write, and I went towards the barn, where I slept upstairs, above <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Duffy’s room. It was quite dark. Without any conscious intention, it seemed I walked into the chapel instead of going upstairs. There was a candle burning by the Little Flower. (I didn’t know what the Little Flower was. I had always bought Carmen and Sharon a red rose every day or two, and had brought one for Dorothy when I could get one. I did not know how I was “working against my stubborn self,” for Dorothy had put a rose by the Little Flower, and it was there while I prayed and meditated for an hour or more.) I had always prayed for grace and wisdom when in a Catholic Church, and I did so now. Much of the time I was just quiet, and did not say any prayers. I did not hear any “voices,” but there came to me a clear assurance that the Catholic Church was the true Church, that whatever I did not understand would be explained to me, that I was not hurting the Church by remaining outside: I was only hurting myself. For I needed this spiritual insight that Dorothy had when she knelt, and the main thing now in my life was to work toward getting it.</p>
			<p>I did not think anything about theology. I had the confidence in my heart that this was the road upon which I was now entering. How fast I would travel depended upon myself, and upon more of this Grace from God that I had prayed for since 1950, and that had been present all that day. It was as if the Communist family represented my first Marxian Socialism, by which I had gotten away from a bourgeois surrounding. God had brought them there to bless me by their kindness, tolerance, and courage. It was as if Tolstoy himself was there, as represented in his short story, sent by God to bless me in my life of voluntary poverty and hard labor, in my tax refusal and anarchist emphasis. It was as if Dorothy had brought us all together by her great life of love and sacrifice, sent by God to bless me in a deeper spirituality. I was very happy. I told Dorothy about it in the morning and she said not to be in a hurry, but to study and pray, and get the cobwebs out of my brain. She gave me Karl Adam’s <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Spirit of Catholicism</i>. A few days later, I had come upstairs from supper, and was typing in the office. Dorothy was leaving soon on a speaking trip to the West. She called from the corner of the stairway. I looked up and here she was, holding a whiskey bottle, half full, which she just retrieved from an “ambassador,” who had thought himself hidden in the dim hallway. I poured it in the nearby toilet.</p>
			<p>In the morning, several of us got up early to go to the bus with her. We could not get out of the premises, for several men were sleeping against the iron gate at the bottom of the front stairway. They finally awakened, and made room for us to get through to the street. We all went to mass at the ornate <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis Church, near the bus station, and as we left, Dorothy placed the current red rose I had given her, with a prayer, to the statue of <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis, to the left of the entrance. We went to the small lunchroom down the street, as it was not yet time for the bus to leave. In the midst of our meal, a big taxi man came in and quarreled with a smaller one about some parking arrangement, finally swinging at him and bloodying his nose. The smaller man quickly picked up a sugar bowl and threw it mightily in the face of his opponent. The latter went outside screaming, and seeking to rub the broken glass, sugar, and blood from his eyes and face. The owner of the restaurant was wringing his hands about who would pay for his damn sugar bowl. Dorothy asked me to open her grip, which was near me. She took out a towel, got some cold water, and went outside and bathed the face of the “aggressor.” Thus, her exit from New York was to be typical of the problems of New York, and of the world.</p>
			<p>Saying goodbye at the bus, Dorothy remembered that I had not digested all of the events of the past ten days clearly in my mind. While I knew the direction in which I was headed, I did not know how fast I would go in my search for spiritual truth. I had thought that I would read Karl Adam’s book, and the one, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Lessons on Love</i> by Goodier published by the <abbr>St.</abbr> Meinard Press, the Catechism and other material, talk to Father Dunne in Phoenix, and be baptized by Father Casey in the fall of 1953, when I again went to his Maryfarm retreat. I would meet Dorothy in Phoenix around Christmas and tell her of my spiritual progress. All that I remembered was that she whispered for me not to forget about “that other,” meaning my spiritual growth. She says that she quoted from the Psalms “My heart is ready, O Lord,” but I do not remember it.</p>
			<p>Two nights later, I talked on Christian Anarchism at the <abbr class="initialism">S.I.A.</abbr> hall at 813 Broadway. I did not enter into Catholic dogma, for I did not yet know much about it, but did as I had done for years: praised the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. Most of those present liked my militant opposition to war and to the payment of taxes for war. Several did not like my reference to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, and one comrade waxed especially strong in his denunciation of the Church and the hierarchy. Before I could answer, up jumps Bill Ryan with a defense of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> and the Sermon on the Mount, although he was atheistic. Bill had admired and known Peter in the old days.</p>
			<p>With my heritage of disgust at Billy Sunday’s hellfire and the “once saved always saved” Calvinist doctrine, which also linked capitalism and Protestantism as of God, I had always thought that the Catholic church must be just a little worse in every way than the Protestants. It seemed to be so dogmatic, and did not admit of any of the whittling away of doctrine, like the Unitarians, where a good book review takes the place of religion, or like the Quakers, where their witness against war simmers down to admitting such a renegade and open advocate of war as Whittaker Chambers.</p>
			<p>With all of my wrong ideas about the Catholic Church, I was now committed in my heart to become a Catholic, so it was up to me to see what all their theology meant. I had always said that if the Catholic Church was from God, then it deserved all the more condemnation, because it had departed so far from the Sermon on the Mount as to support war and capitalism.</p>
			<p>Now, as I read Karl Adam’s small book, I began to get a clearer idea of what the Church meant. I will go into detail on this subject because, until this was made plain to me, I could not really call myself a Catholic. The reader who knows all this can bear with my insufficient knowledge and understanding, and the non-Catholic who reads can go along with me in my search for truth. I do not want to become a theologian, but I will at least have to know what certain terms mean to me.</p>
			<p><b>Original Sin.</b> I had for the most of my adult life followed the philosophy of Rousseau, to the effect that we were born perfect but were corrupted by society⁠—that is, by government mostly⁠—and by organized religion, which commercialized the teachings of Christ and other great teachers, and had blasphemously called evil good. Naturally, I had not known the Catholic doctrine, and had been antagonized by the extreme hell-and-damnation Protestant teaching. I knew that an anarchist society could not exist until people chose to do good of themselves, and as I looked around among anarchists and almost everyone else, it seemed that there was an awful lot of meanness in the world. How come? Even if the Rousseauian idea was correct, what could be done about it? So when I understood the Catholic teaching of original sin, and how it was to be overcome by the Grace of God, then this was the main theological obstacle overcome.</p>
			<p>In his book Karl Adam said:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Though original sin brought a weakening of nature, it did not bring as well a physical deterioration or corruption of our bodily and mental powers.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>This was an entirely different thing from being “conceived in sin and born in iniquity.” The Grace of God brings man away from his blemish and the sacraments keep him away. If this has not worked out correctly for many Catholics, that is not my business. I had better attend to Hennacy first.</p>
			<p><abbr>St.</abbr> Thomas, in the Summa, put it this way:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>In relation to Adam, we are to some extent like the children of a millionaire who has lost all his money. We cannot begin life with as much power as our father once had. But we have, through our own free will and the grace of Christ, the power to build up our fortune in good works. If we sin instead, it will be our own fault.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>What had seemed to me a mumble jumble of holy water and criss-crossing, I now saw was the <b>Liturgy</b>, as the daily redeeming grace of Christ present. I blushed at the wisecrack I had often made when a Catholic mentioned Grace, and I said, “or Ethel.” I had quoted Giovannitti, the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> poet, to the effect that “the holy wafer is but kneaded dough … spit on their God.” As a non-Catholic I had thought that the Holy Eucharist had a magic which dumb Catholics used as an excuse to keep on sinning, with the <abbr class="initialism">o.k.</abbr> of the priest and the Church. I now saw that the priest might be fooled, and a person taking communion might possibly fool themselves and those present, but God was not fooled. The sacraments were the actual body and blood of Christ. Whether Giovannitti, who was a fallen away Protestant ministerial student now turned against religion, wanted to scorn both the communion of sincere and hypocritical Catholics, and what proportion there were of hypocrites who attended mass, was not my problem. I repeat that I had better attend to Hennacy and his growth in understanding things of the spirit, first.</p>
			<p>As Karl Adam says,</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>The sacramental grace flows directly from Jesus into the soul of the believer. The sacrament is no more than an appointed sign of Christ, an objectivization of the gracious will of Jesus, a visible and perceptible “I will, be thou made clean.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Now, as I went to mass daily, I saw that if a person was spiritually alive and wished to keep that way, the perfect thing to do was to go to mass and take communion daily. This was not being priest-ridden. It was a means of spiritual growth. I was to join the church to praise God for the spirituality of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> and for the Communion of Saints. The Catholic Church was open day or night, and one could go in there and pray, it was not just a matter of listening to dreary theology on a Sunday.</p>
			<p>I had looked upon the <b>Hierarchy</b> as a lot of despots ruling the dumb masses who went to mass. To my astonishment, the anarchist idea of no majority rule worked right along with this idea of the hierarchy, and against the majority rule whereby Protestants elected bishops, and factions fought one against another. Not that there was no “politics” in selection of Catholic bishops, Monsignors, Knights of Malta, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> But historically, a guiding hand always seemed to produce saints among these materialists. Closely connected with this new discovery was the idea that there was more freedom within the Catholic church than there was on the outside, where radicals would quote Bakunin or Marx, and would no more think of being a heretic to them than a Catholic would be to the Pope. Yet here was a queer thing: all through the history of the Church there were bad Popes and scheming Cardinals and corrupt alliances with corrupt kings, yet, somehow, there always arose a <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis, a Hildebrand, a Catherine of Sienna, and now the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, to bring such a great light that there was a step forward despite the mistakes made. I was wrong to look at the corruption in the Church as being the whole Church, and forget that within this great body there was a spirit which also produced great saints. This was not too obvious, and if a person wanted freedom in the Church he had to fight for it. But it has always been the case anywhere that the best things in the world have to be earned the hard way. Easy things come easy.</p>
			<p>We are urged to speak the truth. Adam says:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>When He (Jesus) called the Pharisees whited sepulchres and a breed of vipers, and Herod a fox, He was not inspired by any sort of hatred against individuals, but by the tremendous earnestness of truth.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>In the small book <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Lessons on Love</i> Goodier says:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Our lord was troubled in the Garden, but we are not told that He was troubled at the sight of the Cross.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Also:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Faith teaches us to believe in everybody, not as satisfied optimists, but as men among other fellow-men. Hope gives us the confidence that nothing we do is wasted. Charity goes further; it bids us not easily to miss a chance of doing good, not to act on the defensive, never to use the arguments that we are not obliged as a reason for standing aloof.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Here is enough idealism for a radical.</p>
			<p><b>The Pope</b>, I was to find out, is not a despot. He had to go to confession to any common priest. If ignorant Catholics followed him or ignoble members of the hierarchy when they spoke as very fallible human beings, and refused to listen to him or them when they spoke with theological authority, that was their discrepancy. As a good Christian, and as a good Catholic, I would do the opposite. Adam spoke of Pope Innocent <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>’s being wrong when he inveighed against witches, and of the Church’s being wrong in opposing Galileo. These were matters of opinion, not of Christ and God and faith and morals. There was this thing also, that the value of the sacraments did not depend upon how good an orator a priest was. In themselves they brought grace. So with the Pope: he could be good or bad, but the truth of the Church was there all the time, and even a dozen bad Popes could not kill the real Church. Adam says that no one can be sure, even the Pope, that he is in a state of grace, and really saved. Only God knows. I had often said, and have heard others say, that they needed no priest to come between them and God, for they could deal with God directly. Generally this was an alibi, for while they <em>could</em>, they practically never <em>did</em> get a direct contact with God. And by taking communion from the poorest excuse for a priest, there surely was no attachment to a great orator or divine by which notice of God would be deflected.</p>
			<p><b>The Ideal.</b> Adam says:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Wherever a purely human ideal seeks to assert itself, and men are taken captive by values less than the ultimate value, then the Church proves herself an irreconcilable opponent.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And when the Church fails to do this, it is also living up to its tradition for …</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>it is a field of wheat in which there is much cockle, a net that contains both good and bad fish.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>As Cardinal Newman says, “The Church is ever-ailing, and lingers on in weakness, always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might he manifest in her body.”</p>
			<p><b>Freedom &amp; Conscience Above All</b>⁠—Karl Adam says that a man is bound to that which appears to his conscience to be God’s will, although the judgement of his conscience be objectively false. No less an authority than <abbr>St.</abbr> Thomas stresses this obligation of the erroneous conscience. Even in so vital a matter as a belief in Christ, a man would act wrongly who should profess this faith against the judgement of his (erroneous) conscience. He also says that the Vatican Council condemns blind faith. “He is bound to follow his conscience and conscience alone.”</p>
			<p>Concerning pastoral authority, Adam says, “There is no absolute certainty that all the particular measures of the pastoral authority are according to the mind and spirit of Christ.”</p>
			<p>Therefore if I, as an anarchist and pacifist, do not agree with the prevailing support of capitalism and war by the clergy that is perfectly <abbr class="initialism eoc">o.k.</abbr> I do not have to agree with them. I have freedom. There is also this dogma, that it is Grace from God, and not the great brains of theologians and the hierarchy, that have produced real Christianity.</p>
			<p><b>Love.</b> Adam points out that the supreme test was: “See how these Christians love one another.” So this is the best of arguments why those of us of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, who stress returning good for evil, and are pacifists and anarchists, are really working with the spirit of the Church. How can those who bless the killing of Catholics by Catholics in wars love one another?</p>
			<p>Adam says that many theologians become so narrow that they do not see the luminous torch that,</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>The Kingdom of God is not a kingdom of the sword, that a man should forgive his offending brother seventy times seven times, and that fire should not be invoked from heaven upon unbelieving cities.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Father Goodier says,</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Love does not always calculate, does not always consider pros and cons, is not always prudent, as some philosophers understand that virtue, does not always look for success, but once aroused shuts its eyes, “gives and does not count the cost, fights and does not heed the wounds, toils and does not seek for rest, labors and looks for no reward,” lays down its life and does not think about it. Such a nature is dangerous? Yes … it is the essence of all greatness to face what is dangerous. … The man who would truly love, and know to the full what it means, will beware of that timid, limping thing which sometimes parades, and hides its littleness, under the name of prudence.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And Goodier again,</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>A stoic, ancient or modern, who boasts of being above emotion, who acts by his reason and that only, who prides himself on doing his duty, has triumphed over love, scotched it if he has not killed it; it is a gruesome triumph, the triumph of the polar ice over the underlying land. Beauty there may be of a kind; beauty, and strength, and stillness; but life, and warmth, and growth, and fruitfulness there can be none … Love is a restless thing. Idleness and love are incompatible; love cannot go asleep … The wastrel who meets you may not deserve your penny; if he receives it he may even chuckle at his fortune and your weakness; nevertheless, as often as not, he goes away with something more than a penny in his hand, something in his heart of which he is not aware, but which someday will bear fruit, the memory of one who has treated him above that which he has deserved, the memory of a kind deed done.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p><b>For All People</b>⁠—Adam points out that for those who can understand but little, the very minimum is required, and for those who can understand and practice more, then more is required and expected, up to the criterion of <abbr>St.</abbr> Augustine, who says, “Love and do what you will.” What could be more anarchistic? And the final criterion, “If thou wilt be perfect, go sell that thou hast, and give to the poor … and come follow me.”</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>In the Catholic Church alone may we discern an organic growth in the consciousness of the faith. There is no petrifaction here. … thus the church has a message for men of every age … She does not hesitate even to take over pagan ritual and pagan symbols, whenever such things can be Christianized and reformed. This is not weakness, or unprincipled accommodation, but practical Catholicism. It is a direct consequence of that fundamental Catholic conviction that every genuine value, everything that comes from pure and uncorrupted nature, belongs to God and has citizen rights to His Kingdom.</p>
				<p>Other sheep have I which are not of this fold.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Adam says:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Wherever the Gospel of Jesus is faithfully preached, and wherever baptism is conferred with faith in His Holy Name, there His grace can operate. When the disciples would have forbidden a man who had not attached himself to Jesus from casting out devils in His name, Our Lord declared: “Forbid him not.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And again:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>In those non-Catholic bodies in which the apostolic succession has been maintained by means of valid Episcopal ordinations, as in the schismatic churches of the East, and in the Jansenist and Old-Catholic churches, she still recognizes the validity of all these sacraments.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Adam also says that among Protestants, and Jews, Turks, and Japanese, Grace can abound and saints occur, especially among the Russians. It was Pope Clement <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> in 1713 who especially rejected the proposition that “outside the Church there is no grace.” The praise of Gandhi by the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> has aroused the ire of the near followers of the excommunicated Father Feeney, who feels that no one but Catholics can go to heaven.</p>
			<p><b>Heresy</b>⁠—When I was speaking in Minneapolis, someone asked me if I was a convert of Bishop Fulton Sheen. I replied that he converted the big convertibles, and that I came in the Left door. The same person wondered if I was trying to “bore from within” the Church. I answered that my purpose was to gain spiritual growth, and everything I did would be in the open, and in the tradition of the best of Catholic saints, I hoped. He wondered what I would do if the Pope ordered me to pay taxes. I told him that I was willing to take the risk that this would never occur. A friendly priest gave me a good answer to this by saying, “The Pope tells me to walk on my hands. So what?”</p>
			<p>No use in speaking of such foolish things. However, the priest said that, in Catholic teaching, a person was bound to live true to his conscience or there was no basis for morality at all. So I was glad to read what Karl Adam had to say about heresy:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Catholicism has sometimes repelled and rejected outright a heretical position with all its implications, reasons, and consequences in order to prevent any contamination of revealed truth, and then, when the danger of such contamination was past, has taken over these elements of truth which heresy had grasped but wrongly emphasized, and moulding them into harmony with the whole of revelation, has consciously built them into her teaching and maintained them.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I can now see that the emphasis on Christian Anarchism by the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> might cause the hierarchy to ban the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. Karl Adam says that Aristotelianism is used by church authorities today, but was forbidden as “the source of all heresies,” and not allowed to be taught at the University of Paris, in the 13th century.</p>
			<p>In the first edition of this book, when I had been a Catholic less than a year, I said that if I were the editor and were ordered by the Pope or the Cardinal to cease publication, I would do so for the ultimate good of the Church. But, after mature deliberation, I decided that I would not do this. In February of 1960, for instance, while I was speaking in Chicago at the Catholic Worker house at 164 Oak Street, a phone call came from the Chancery office, and a loud voice could be heard roaring that unless we took the name Catholic off our headquarters, they would send the police and have the place closed up. It was a Monsignor, who had evidently been angered at the complaints of Catholics who objected to our distributing anti-tax leaflets in front of the Federal Building and protesting the arrest of Rose Robinson for nonpayment of income tax. I told Dorothy about it later that day, and she said, “His bark is probably worse than his bite. We have had this kind of trouble before.”</p>
			<p>And she mentioned how she had had to go to the Chancery office to hear complaints about some of Robert Ludlow’s articles in the past.</p>
			<p>But Karl Meyer, who is a fine young man, but only 22, did not question the order, and changed the name of the house to <abbr>St.</abbr> Stephen’s, after the first martyr who had been a server of tables, and whose feast is celebrated the day after Christmas.</p>
			<p>I do not blame Karl, for who, at the age of 22, fights the Chancery office? But I felt to rationalize this, and say that the name Catholic Worker means nothing, and that we could act just the same under any other name, is cowardly. Dorothy disagrees with me on this, and does not think Karl cowardly. I feel that Dorothy, because she is kindly and motherly, naturally upheld Karl in his stand. Under such circumstances I would not obey, but I would go and try to talk to the Cardinal or Chancellor first, and explain my right as a Catholic to act according to my conscience. I do not think that I will be excommunicated for disobeying Caesar and being a radical anarchist, for I do not deny Church dogma, but only the support of Churchmen for exploitation and war; but if it ever did come to that, I would consider myself excommunicated, like <abbr>St.</abbr> Joan of Arc. Those folk excommunicated themselves, not her. I would still be in the <em>real</em> church, the church of the saints.</p>
			<p><b>Saints</b> were fellow-workers of Christ. Much of my attraction to the Church was for this Communion of the Saints. While some Catholics might seem superstitious and foolish in their veneration for certain saints, yet this has to be allowed, for with it can come great spiritual growth, at times.</p>
			<p><b>Indulgences.</b> I had often asked about them, but never did get a clear explanation. Adam made it appear logical, although in the past they were a source of great scandal. And today they are not the most important feature of the Church but are a means of helping weaker Catholics⁠—out of the great reservoir of sanctity of the Saints. Adam says that <em>an indulgence is not a remission of sin but only of the temporal penalties attached to sin</em>.</p>
			<p><b>Church and State</b>⁠—Adam says that the Church has not, for long, been the handmaiden of any state, although this has happened at times. I feel that it has happened nearly all of the time, but if the name “Catholic” means “universal” then it really means it was not Italian, Spanish, American, or any other church, but a Church Universal.</p>
			<p><b>Sex.</b> I had often said that Catholics did not believe in birth control because they wanted more children born so there would be more Catholics, and more money for the Church. It really isn’t that bad. A woman wrote a letter, once, to a vegetarian paper, saying that there were two main sins: white bread and birth control. There is no doubt that they are both unnatural and detrimental. Catholic teaching on sex (outside of the native Irish, who get so puritanical they put the Puritans to shame) is much more natural and wholesome than the terrible Protestant “garment of shame.” It is not my fault that the Church makes itself look foolish by insisting on the wickedness of birth control because it is mechanical, when she takes all the rest of the mechanical civilization that goes with it: Atom Bombs and all. It is a sin not to have a child conceived, but when he grows up, it is <abbr class="initialism">o.k.</abbr> to kill him and have him kill others in war.</p>
			<p>I oversimplify this for emphasis, but if the reader gets the point, I will add that the Church condemns birth control because it frustrates the end of action. Like eating for pleasure and vomiting after, as the Romans did. It is contrary to natural law, and therefore immoral. But so is killing!</p>
			<p>Now, after ten years, I tend to agree with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Frank Lorimer, Professor of Sociology at the American University, Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr>, and honorary president of the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population, who in the Winter 1963 issue of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Cross Currents</i>, reviews a book, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Family Planning and Modern Problems</i>, by <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stanislas de Lestapis, <abbr class="initialism eoc">S.J.</abbr> I quote: “Nevertheless the statements of some priests imply a tolerance of irresponsible reproduction as the natural consequence of the unregulated satisfaction of sexual impulse. High fertility, as such, and large families in particular have been honored without respect to conditions, motives, or consequences. <abbr>Fr.</abbr> de Lestapis repudiates this point of view. A true interpretation of Catholic doctrine supports the ideal of responsible parenthood …”</p>
			<p>The accusation has been made that the use of contraceptives leads to sexual abnormality and perversion. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lorimer answers this objection: “This thesis lacks substantial basis and is an unwarranted slander on the private lives of many non-Catholic couples and of some high-minded Catholics who do not adhere to the teachings of their church in this respect.” And he adds, “Are not desertion, illegitimacy, and irresponsible procreation greater evils than contraception?”</p>
			<p>I have heard whiskey-faced, obese priests, who would seem never to have controlled their gluttony, tell young couples to sleep together, but to have “self-control.”</p>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4>I Am Baptized</h4>
				<p>Dorothy had not planned to be in Chicago, but suddenly a meeting was arranged, and she wrote to me in Cleveland that she would be there November 7th. I had planned to be there about that time also, and was glad to meet her and tell her of the progress of my reading, and thinking, and praying. I had planned to be in Hutchinson, Minnesota to see Father Casey around the middle of the month, but was two days late getting there. Dorothy had not known just when she would speak there, but she arrived a few minutes after I came, not knowing I was there.</p>
				<p>In conversation, I asked Father Casey what was the first thing to do when you joined the Church. He said it was to be baptized. I asked him how much you had to know to be baptized. He replied that no Catholic really ever understood everything as he should, and had to accept much on faith. There would always be some ideas for each of us that would remain a holy “mystery.” He and Dorothy spoke of the Ethiopian who wanted to be baptized right away, while there was the opportunity. I read the Catechism and the Creed, and said I believed it all, although there were some points that needed to be cleared up. Father Casey felt that I had a better understanding than many who were born Catholic, or who were converts. In studying the Catechism I asked him about the question of obeying parents (and from this it flows that we should obey civil laws). We agreed that if a Catholic, in conscience, felt that it was a sin to register for the draft, pay taxes for war, and otherwise be a denial of the Sermon on the Mount, then that person was bound to disobey man and, as <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter did, when arrested twice for breaking the law and speaking the name of Jesus on the street, answer, <em>“We should obey God rather than man.”</em> It would not seem logical that by saying “Render unto Caesar,” which meant giving taxes to kill in war, to spread hatred and lies about the enemy, to return evil for evil, that Jesus would nullify all of His Sermon on the Mount.</p>
				<p>When the Catechism came to the commandment “Thou shalt not kill,” it was asked when was it permitted to kill? The answer was, “in a just war, in capital punishment, and in self defense.” While this might be the rule for those who follow the old eye-for-an-eye teaching of Moses, we felt that a Christian who was led by the Sermon on the Mount could do none of these things. Today there is no “just war,” for civilians are being bombed and, even by the regular rules of a just war, the idea of war is out. Many states and countries do not have capital punishment, and murder is not more prevalent there. Despite that fact I live in a state and a country where it is the law, I am not called upon to be an executioner or a prison guard. If I pay taxes to support such a government, I am denying Christ, and am a part of returning evil for evil instead of returning good for evil. And of course, when it comes to defending oneself by violence, I have already defended myself in a better way, when the man locked me up with a knife⁠—and a person should not go backwards and take up the sword. So to one who tries to practice the Counsels of Perfection, to do less is to follow Christ that much less. Therefore to be a better Christian Anarchist and a better Catholic is perfectly logical, and within the theological setup of the Church.</p>
				<p>Dorothy had said that she would be my Godmother when I was baptized, and Bob Ludlow would be Godfather by proxy, as he was in New York. That evening, Dorothy spoke in the church basement to Father Casey’s people, and I was asked to say a few words. When a man asked me about “Rendering unto Caesar,” Dorothy spoke up before I got my breath, saying, “The less of Caesar’s you have, the less you have to render.” After the meeting was over, Dorothy, Father Casey, and I meditated and prayed for a time in the church, and then, after further explanation as to the meaning of baptism, I was baptized. It was all very sacred and solemn; I saw that water, salt, oil⁠—necessary parts of nature⁠—were linked with my entry into the Church, and as Dorothy had told me once, sensing my objection to holy water, “All water is holy; it makes the corn grow for the Hopi.”</p>
				<p>Later that night, I made my first confession to Father Casey. He encouraged me in my faith, adjured me to keep up my radicalism, and told me that he had baptized me “Ammon <abbr>St.</abbr> John the Baptist Hennacy.” I did not know that a new name was given for the New Life in Christ. Later I asked him if that meant I was to have my head cut off like John the Baptist. He inferred that this might take place and be performed by a Cardinal, as such was the history of many true rebels.</p>
				<p>In traveling around, I had lost track of the day of the month. I found that I had been baptized on <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 17, my mother’s birthday, and the Feast Of <abbr>St.</abbr> Gregory the Wonderworker. Both Dorothy and Father Casey said I would have to do more than move mountains.</p>
				<p>The next morning, we all went to mass, and I took my First Communion. I was very happy.</p>
				<p>After mass, we drove 110 miles, picking up Don Humphries, and went to Grasston, Minnesota to see old man Paul Marquardt. He and I were the only ones who refused to register in both wars. He had read the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> for years, and was overjoyed to see Dorothy. He was “a little shaky from the last round with the officials,” but his eyes were bright, and he was tolerant and friendly, although he belonged to no church, reading the Bible here on his farm. We all felt truly humble in his presence, knowing that he was one of those “not of the fold,” of whom Jesus spoke.</p>
				<p>In the beautiful mass at Monsignor Hellriegel’s in <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis, meeting with <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Kutchera in Madison, Wisconsin, and with Father Becker at <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis University, as well as with many friendly Jesuits on my trip, I was welcomed and asked to speak on my radical Christian Anarchist ideas. Here in Phoenix, Father Dunne, Father Xavier Harris, and fellow priests at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s, and my old friend Father Lawrence, in the parish where I am a member, all explained, very kindly, matters of doctrine which puzzled me, or which were new to me. Father Bechtel asked me to speak again to his Newman Club in the nearby college town of Tempe. When Dorothy came to Phoenix for a week in January, I took the time off, and was able to go to mass and communion daily. I have much to learn, and much humility and love yet to learn, but I feel I am on the right road.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
		<section epub:type="subchapter">
			<h3>Before and after Conversion</h3>
			<p>Reading over my ideas on religion, as written on August 31, 1951, in the light of being a Catholic, naturally, I found that I would place a much different emphasis now. But all of the criticism which I have made of pious frauds in the churches still stands. Likewise, all of the really religious and ethical ideas still seem to me worthy.</p>
			<p>I will review my ideas paragraph by paragraph, placing first what I thought in 1951, and right afterwards what I believe now.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“All things work together for good to those who love God.”</p>
				<p><em>Naturally if I believed in this truth then, I doubly believe in it now.</em> <b>God</b>, or Good, as I prefer to spell it, is the only real force that exists. That only is real which is eternal, and evil is temporal and defeats itself. Despite all the Churches and prayers, very few people really believe in God, for if you believe in a thing, then you must act as if you believed it. Otherwise you are just talking about it. Most people believe more in the power of evil for they do not trust in God, but put their trust in government, insurance, politicians, medicine, war, and anything but God. (1951)</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>God of course is supreme, although it may look as if the devil is running the world, including most churches. It is foolish to take a Pollyanna attitude that evil does not exist. To work with it against good is even worse. I feel that positive action in “living the life” is more important than calling names. I feel that the system of violence is falling to pieces, and those of us who believe otherwise need to “keep the torch burning,” as the saying is, so that there will be some hope. When evil piled on evil destroys itself, there will be those of us who will help with that real force, God, and be His instruments. (1953).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p><b>The Bible</b>, in places, reads like the word of God, especially when speaking through brave prophets like Daniel, but mostly the Old Testament is an alibi for tricks which the Jews worked upon their neighbors to get their land and women, and then put the blame for these tricks upon Jehovah. Practically every sin is condoned for the benefit of the Jews. (1951).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>The Bible still needs to be interpreted by Grace from God, and not by every little loudmouthed Bible-banger who starts a holy-jumper church. My criticism came from my Protestant training of believing every word as literally coming from God, and not as the growth of spiritual understanding during those centuries. To be sure, I had never been as ignorant as it is said Governor Ross Sterling of Texas was, in the thirties, when he was quoted: “What good will Greek and Latin ever do for our children? If the English language was good enough for Jesus Christ, it’s good enough for Texas.”</p>
				<p>I remember, just now, that the Communist whose gracious spirit helped me that Sunday at Peter Maurin Farm to come to prayer and meditation, when I decided to become a Catholic, was Jewish. So despite my former antisemitic attitude, I find that a true Christian should have no animosity toward any race. I shall seek to remember this. (1953).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p><b>Jesus</b> taught something entirely different from the Old Testament. I believe that Jesus was born of a virgin, but this is not the important thing; the important question is⁠—do we follow Him? His message of returning good for evil, of loving your enemy, of turning the other cheek, had been said by the Rabbi Hillel and others, but it was mostly conversation, for no one had been noted for living up to these ideals, much less dying for them. This, of itself, would have made Him a spiritual leader. But others have spoken holy words, and lived in caves, and done miracles. Jesus chose his disciples not from these hermits, but from live men in the world; and He met the issues of the day, instead of talking “pie in the sky.” He said that a rich man could not enter the kingdom of heaven; He spoke of the wrong which lawyers, church officials, and landlords did to the poor⁠—and He drove the moneychangers out of the Temple. The lesson to us today, from the life and methods of Jesus, consists in the fact that:</p>
				<p>He had an ideal.</p>
				<p>He recognized the evil which the rich did to the poor.</p>
				<p>He wrote in the hearts of men a Way of Life which they themselves must use to save them from sin.</p>
				<p>When He had to “put up or shut up,” He bravely died, and did not pipsqueak.</p>
				<p>If we claim to be His followers, we should likewise be brave. (1951)</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>All that I thought on this matter, I still believe, and with the added idea that He brings Grace to help us live according to His ideal through the sacraments, daily mass, and communion. (1953).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p><b>The Early Christians</b> lived as brothers, holding property in common. They were also pacifists, for they “could do violence to no man,” and many were martyred because they would not be soldiers. They were also anarchists, inasmuch as they took no part in government, were denied communion if they went to court on anything, and no one was exploited. All this was changed when Constantine the Great was blest and took over the Church. It has since then always been an organ of reaction. (1951).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>The Early Christians. I agree with all that I wrote on this subject. The only difference now is that although the Catholic Church and other churches have been organs of reaction, I feel that the Catholic Church does not necessarily have to keep on in this role. What the other churches do is not my problem. It is not impossible for the spirit of the early Christians to be prominent again in the Catholic Church. (1953).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p><b>Paul and the Churches</b>⁠—have turned this message of Jesus around to mean nearly the exact opposite of what Jesus intended. His Mercy and Love they have turned into a bargain counter whereby to “sin and be sorry” is all that is needed to join a church, get “pie in the sky” and pay little attention to life on the earth. The fundamentalist Protestant churches are the worst in this respect. Witness the following from a leaflet handed to me while I was picketing, and put out by the Palmcroft Baptist church here in Phoenix: “I offer full pardon; <em>You’ve</em> nothing to do; just <em>trust me</em>; I’ll keep you and take you above; and make you forever ‘a son of My Love.’ ” (1951).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Anyone has a preference as to apostles and saints. I admire <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s courage, and his 13th chapter of First Corinthians, but, generally speaking, I believe that his influence was to dissemble rather than to clarify the ethics of Jesus. So with <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter, I choose to emphasize his “obey God rather than man,” and not to follow him when he praises those in government authority. I think that he denied Christ the fourth time when he spoke contrary to the Sermon on the Mount in upholding the return of evil for evil. Neither he, nor <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul, can be blamed for the mechanization of religion done since, in their names; so I would not now phrase my opinion of them in the same harsh terms. (1953).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p><b>Prayer</b>⁠—“The fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much.” By the same token, insincere prayers are just so many wasted words. My prayer, said often while working, is: “Great God of Truth and Love, bring peace, protection, enlightenment, and encouragement to,” then listing my friends and, especially, my enemies. On Sundays, while fasting, or when passing a Catholic Church, I enter and kneel and ask for Grace and Wisdom for me, a sinner, directing my appeal to Jesus on the Cross. I use no holy water and do not cross myself. (1951).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>I agree with all that I have written above on this subject, except now I do use holy water, and do genuflect and cross myself with meaning, as a help toward spiritual growth. There is spiritual power when spiritual people recite the Rosary. (1953).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p><b>The Catholic Church</b> has produced saints like Francis of Assisi. Personally, I do not believe in the fall of man, Heaven and Hell in the accepted sense, or in bargains in sins according to rules set up, not by Jesus, but by warmongering theologians. The Catholic Church seeks members: quantity, not quality. Those who get promotions are not holy men, but business men. They all support war and capitalism. (1951)</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Of course, my expression on the subject of the Catholic Church has changed, very nearly entirely. As explained elsewhere, I could find no better explanation of evil than that given by the Catholic Church. The priests to whom I have spoken tell me that “it doth not yet appear what man shall be,” so no one knows exactly of what heaven consists, and as to hell, it is best described as absence from God, or darkness, perhaps a burning or yearning of conscience, but not necessarily the fiery hell where one would have to be composed of asbestos to function in this place where fundamentalist Protestants, and some Catholics, would send the unsaved. I know personally of Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops who have praised the radicalism of the Catholic Worker. A few super-patriots among the hierarchy stand out as companions of Joe McCarthy, but many of the others blush to think of his tactics. As a whole, the hierarchy is more radical than the laity. So while this <b>Catholic Worker</b> is the leaven, it is not the only leaven, for there are radical Catholics in France and other countries, too. (1953).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p><b>Reincarnation</b>⁠—the belief of Gandhi seems to me to be more logical than one chance for heaven or hell in this one life. Belief in it is not very important. It is “living the life” that counts. (1951)</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Reincarnation does not now seem to me to be important. The important thing is spiritual growth. I accept the Apostles’ Creed as to life after death. As much as I, or anyone else, can improve spiritually here-and-now is all to the good, no matter what the exact measurement of the future life may be. (1953).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Epilogue</h3>
				<p>“Do you really believe it?” said the Old Pioneer to me, when I returned from my trip last December and told him that I had been baptized a Catholic. “I sure do,” I replied. “I had a kid brother who ‘got religion’ at a revival meeting when he was 16 and it lasted all of his life. He was a good man,” said the Old Pioneer, and added, “Do you feel certain now, and not afraid?” I told him that I was never uncertain nor afraid since my time in solitary in Atlanta, and the reason I had joined the Church now was to praise God, and for the Communion of the Saints. He had been reading the Bible all winter. He had several versions, including the new Catholic New Testament (Young Orme gave that to me to remember the old man by). Most old-timers around here already know the Mormon Bible, and they either believe it or they don’t.</p>
				<p>One Saturday afternoon, while I was cleaning the Old Pioneer’s house for an hour, I noticed some teenagers on bicycles pass by my shack, to the left of the garage. I thought nothing about it, as people often come in here, thinking this road goes some place, only to find it a dead end. When I went over to my shack a little later, I found all of my papers, books, <abbr>etc.</abbr> piled in the middle of the floor, and some articles of value missing. I had heard of other places being messed up by youngsters. When I told the Old Pioneer about it, he was very angry, and said I should call the sheriff that the kids should be “whupped;” they didn’t do enough “whupping” these days.</p>
				<p>After I had told him I would say nothing of it to the authorities, and would pray for the kids, as I had for vigilantes who had come after me here, in order that they would not get into more mischief, he calmed down. Later, he was reading the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and said to me, “Every time I read Dorothy’s column I get ashamed of myself in such a big house; why, do you know 100 families could each have a house and more than an acre on this land? But then, I’m too old to think of such new things.” Then, as if he had admitted too much, he added with a wry smile, “I can’t see Dorothy feeding all these bums who never work and wouldn’t work. They do nothing but drink. But who am I, a sinner, to tell Dorothy anything?”</p>
				<p>One evening, he told me, “If I ever joined any church it would be the Catholic. You believe it, Dorothy believes it. It is the only church that doesn’t whittle things away into nothing.” I told him that I was not the one to tell him to hurry, for I had been nearly 60 years about it myself. When Dorothy was here, he told her that he had advised me to join the church. Perhaps he had this in his mind to tell me, but he never really told me. He was only glad that I did. He had always admired Gandhi. Although he had never been in any war, he was a great student of history, and knew the details of battle formation from almost any battle you could mention. He knew Arizona history, too, and admired the Hopi. He had met my Hopi friends when they came.</p>
				<p>Three times, in the five years that I had been here, he had been taken to the hospital for several weeks because of his stomach ulcers. Several times, I noticed a light in his house around 2 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr>, and came over and asked if he was sick. He had spells of vomiting. I wanted to sleep on the couch here, so I could be near if he wanted me, but he felt this would be giving in, and he wouldn’t have it. I had wanted to feed the chickens, or gather and pack the eggs, but he felt this was his job and no one could do it just right. I had taken the morning off twice a week, through February, in order to accompany him to town when he took the eggs to the store on Tuesdays and Fridays, and carry them in for him. He had stopped to have an examination by the doctor, and took different kinds of medicine. I had planned to go to the Hopi with Joe Craigmyle on <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 28th, and when I came back he was going to the hospital, but that day he felt worse, and his son took him in. Right before I left, he did show me the details of the care of the chickens.</p>
				<p>I called him on the phone several times when I returned and, the day before I picketed, March 13th, I visited him. I had sent in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Arizona Sketchbook</i>, by my banker friend Frank Brophy, for him to read, and it was the last thing he read. (Brophy had good-naturedly inscribed it to “The One Man Revolution from a Pipsqueak.”) The Old Pioneer’s ulcers had healed and formed scar tissue which closed the duodenum, so that he would starve to death if not operated upon, and there was only a chance that, at his age of 80, he might stand the operation. He wanted to know about the chickens, and told me to eat all the cracked eggs I liked, “and even some good ones.” He was operated on the 14th, and came out of the ether alright. Several days later, when I had worked all day and all night, and was very tired, and was sleeping soundly, I awoke feeling that something was wrong with him. I prayed for him. The next day his son said they had been called and he had nearly died at just that time. He held on and did not get worse for a few days.</p>
				<p>I phoned Father George Dunne, whose name the Old Pioneer knew from my mention of him before, and asked him to call at the hospital. Father Dunne called that evening, and said something about his being an “old-timer,” who had many things to do yet. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Orme corrected him sharply, saying, “Old Pioneer sounds better.” He then asked to be baptized. A doctor, a Catholic nurse, and a Catholic woman who happened to be visiting just then, were witnesses. When Father Dunne left, the Old Pioneer said, “God bless you, Father Dunne.” Two days later, on March 26, the old Pioneer died in his sleep.</p>
				<p>Both of the Phoenix papers, and the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Arizona Farmer</i>, had editorials about his death. While I was waiting in the funeral parlor, I became acquainted with the Secretary and Vice-President of the Old Pioneer organization, recognizing them from conversation I had about them previously with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Orme. As his wife and son and daughter-in-law were Episcopalians, it was thought best to have the funeral under that auspices; they were glad that Father Dunne had been there to give him the peace of mind which he desired.</p>
				<p>The papers spoke of him as being an Empire Builder, and of his fine services to the Valley. But up to the very last, he was just as much an enemy of the bankers and industrialists who sought to commercialize the Valley as he had been 20 years before, when these local papers made fun of his “one-man revolution,” saying he could not overturn the bankers who had control of the Water Users Association. The old man had denounced this control, which they had gained by subdividing big holdings into names of dummies, who thus gave them more votes. He got the rules changed, and was president of the Association for 14 years.</p>
				<p>They forgot to mention that, in 1916, when the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr>’s were driven out of Bisbee by copper owners, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Orme resigned in protest from the local Rotary Club, which approved this action, saying, “If they can drive the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W</abbr>’s out of Bisbee they can drive Ormes out of Phoenix. To hell with you.”</p>
				<p>He it was who also told me, when I offered to leave his place rather than have him bothered with tax men nibbling at me for my anti-tax attitude, “stay here and fight them.” He knelt to no man. Now, belatedly, he knelt to God.</p>
				<p>One night, recently, after irrigating for a long stretch, and when I was thus sleeping very soundly, the Old Pioneer appeared to me in a dream. He looked very tired, and not at all belligerent. With a soft smile he said, “I wouldn’t ‘whup’ them, now.” I then awoke. This was not a vision like that of the Blue Flame; it was just a dream, but it was real and full of meaning to me.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
