<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 21</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter21" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 21</h2>
				<h3>The Mormons</h3>
				<h3>1961⁠–present</h3>
				<h3>Salt Lake City, Utah</h3>
			</header>
			<p>“Are you going to be a Mormon now?” asked a Catholic friend when he heard that I was going to live in Salt Lake City.</p>
			<p>“If it is the best I will: you wouldn’t want me to follow the second-best, would you?” And a Mormon asked me if I was on a mission. “Sure,” I replied.</p>
			<p>It is with a friendly feeling toward Mormons that I came here. It is in the spirit of honest inquiry that I have attended Sacrament meetings nearly every Sunday at the University Ward, and I have read a score of books pro and con about the Mormons. I have also attended the Reorganized Church and the polygamous “Church of the First Born of The Fullness of Times.” I realize that it is presumptuous to write about the Mormons with less than three years in Salt Lake City, but I have done the best I could to understand their religion, studying The Book of Mormon and The Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price. I will learn more and more as I continue to study and to meet Mormons.</p>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4>Joseph Smith</h4>
				<p>If I believed in the revelations of Joseph Smith I would be a Mormon. My great-great-grand-parents on my mother’s side were Quakers and Baptists who lived not far from the uproar of the Kirtland, Ohio community. Alexander Campbell had belonged to the Achor Baptist church where I was baptized at the age of 11, and he left it and went to Brush Run, <abbr class="postal">Pa.</abbr> to start his Campbellite church, being inspired by God that one more true church was needed, he said. The Mormons and the Campbellites converted each other back and forth in and around Kirtland. If I had been a young man then it is possible that I might have followed Smith who was a radical who wanted a society without any rich or poor, all living together as brothers. He called in 1844 when he ran for President for the slaves to be bought off from their masters and freed, and for the prisons to be emptied and schools established in their place, although as it will be shown in this chapter later, Brigham Young and others were anti-Negro. Now, in 1963, Mormon missionaries are being sent to Negroid Africa. The cynical here say it is because they do not wish to alienate the Negro vote if and when George Romney, the Mormon Governor of Michigan, chooses to run for the Presidency. The Mormons succeeded in communal life for a longer time where the radical colonists, such as Robert Owen and the followers of Fourier failed.</p>
				<p>I am not giving the history of the Golden Plates or of the persecutions of the Mormons. In the appendix I list books as references upon which I have based opinions which I give in this book. Others can read for themselves. Tolstoy told Ambassador White that “the Mormon people taught the American religion” and that “on the whole he preferred a religion which professed to have dug its sacred books out of the earth to one which pretended that they were let down from heaven.”<a href="#note1" id="note-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> Although these plates were supposed to be sent from heaven to the Hill Cumorah.</p>
				<p>When Smith was accused by members of his church of not being a good prophet because he had trusted in people who defaulted, he prayed to God and God told him that <em>“Some revelations are of God; some revelations are of man; and some revelations are of the devil.”</em> At another time some of his followers expected pious dignity from him and he told them that “a prophet is only a prophet when he is acting as such… at 4 in the afternoon I went out with my little Frederick to exercise myself by sliding on the ice.”<a href="#note2" id="note-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a> At another time he had healed many of the sick and told his followers not to bring any more for he I felt like wrestling. He would challenge any person and he usually won. It was likely that the faith folks had in him produced much of the healing. In fact he was astonished at his success. A Campbellite preacher came and wanted a sign, saying that he would believe and bring all of his congregation with him. Joseph explained his ideas but the pious fool insisted upon a miracle, so Joseph said, “What will you have done? Will you be struck dumb, blind? Will you be paralyzed, or will you have one hand withered? Take your choice, choose which you please, and in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ it shall be done.” The preacher replied that this was not the kind of miracle he wanted. Joseph answered, “Then sir, I can perform none. I am not going to bring trouble upon anyone else to convince you.”<a href="#note3" id="note-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> One is reminded of Christ refusing to show off when the Devil tempted him to turn stones into bread, jump down from the Temple, or to be given charge of the whole material world. And by the way, it is just this charge that all Christian churches had succumbed to serving Caesar instead of God that provided the reason for a new religion.</p>
				<p>A visiting English clergyman asked Joseph why he got drunk. His answer was so that his followers would not worship him too much. He said “I am not so much a Christian as many suppose I am. When a man undertakes to ride me for a horse, I feel disposed to kick up and throw him off, and ride him.” And he told the Englishman, “I love that man better who swears a stream as long as my arm, yet deals justice to his neighbors and mercifully deals his substance to the poor, than the long, smooth-faced hypocrite. I do not want you to think that I am very righteous for I am not.”<a href="#note4" id="note-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> In his journal for March 13, 1843 he said, “I wrestled with William Wall, the most expert in Ramus, and threw him. In the afternoon held a church meeting.” When asked to say a blessing at a meal he said, “Lord we thank Thee for this johnny-cake, and ask Thee to send us something better. Amen.”<a href="#note5" id="note-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> Those who have seen Burt Lancaster in the movie <i epub:type="se:name">Elmer Gantry</i> have met a likeable half-rogue, who, no matter what he did, was charming. I expect that Joseph Smith was an imaginative sort of Huck Finn, surrounded by religious excitement. When he said that the people on the Moon were six feet tall, were dressed like Quakers and lived a thousand years,” no one could prove that he was wrong. Werner says that “in his youth Joseph Smith was torn between the fear of not being saved eternally and the desire to have a good time from day to day. Fortunately for his peace of mind he was able to reconcile the two by having himself appointed to have a good time.”<a href="#note6" id="note-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a></p>
				<p>It is conceivable that he prayed to God to tell him what was the true religion and it would not take much honesty to see that all religions had long forgotten the Sermon on the Mount. Joseph must have had some rebellious feelings and he likely would have heard of his great-great-grand-father who was chairman of those who formed the Boston Tea Party.<a href="#note7" id="note-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a> If a person does not believe that Joseph found the Golden Plates, or if he found them, that the message was not the truth, or garbled truth, how can they be explained? I have read of the argument that he copied them from Spauding’s book, and I have read the parallels between Ethan Smith’s book printed in Putney, <abbr class="postal">Vt.</abbr> in 1823 and The Book of Mormon concerning the American Indians and I do not think the evidence is conclusive that Joseph ever heard of these books, for when he got his revelations there was no holding him back, and his wife and Oliver Cowdry and Martin Harris would nearly be worn out writing down what he told them while burying his face in his hat with the magic stone or stones which it is said produced The Book of Mormon. Oliver Cowdry may have helped in the grammar of The Book of Mormon and may have cut out a few hundred “verily”s and “It came to pass”es. The witnesses, most of whom apostasized later, still held to the fact that they had seen the plates, and that Heavenly Personages had spoken to Joseph Smith and to them, but Cowdry, David Whitmer, and Harris said later that these Heavenly Personages had appeared to them and told them to get out of the Mormon Church for it was corrupt. As Joseph himself said revelations came from three sources so his may have been a mixture. Perhaps the credulity of his followers pushed him on. He may have deluded himself without being consciously fraudalent. He did not pretend to be a man of the character of Gandhi or of <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis. But he did the thing they never tried to do: to establish a new religion. In Hiram, Ohio, where he was beaten and left for dead, the next morning he preached forgiveness to those who had beaten him, some of whom were in the audience, and he made three converts. He was here at his best. When he strutted in uniform before the Nauvoo Leglon and when he had Law’s and Bennett’s press destroyed he was at his worst. He was more realistic and much more of a likeable human being than the dour Alexander Campbell; than the Fox sisters who founded Spirituallsm in the New York area where he lived; than the fanatic Miller who expected the end of the world. He would seem more honest than <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Eddy, who in 1866 got ideas from Quimby in Portland, <abbr class="postal">Me.</abbr> but who sald that these ideas were “uncontaminated by human hypothesis and divinely authorized.” She also said to follow her only inasmuch as she followed Christ and the Sermon on the Mount and that it was better to suffer death than to inflict it. Yet most minority religions make a great point also of obeying the law and of being super patriotic. This comes from a desire to be accepted, even though many of their other principles would tend to make them unacceptable. So it is that both the Christian Scientists and Joseph Smith when accused of being subversive could point to their patriotism and law obedience tenets. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Eddy, like Joseph Smith and the Mormons whocame after him, made changes in the “inspired” word, which if it was inspired ought not to need changes. He did not go as far as John Humphrey Noyes in the Oneida Community of free love. On the whole he was a charmmg man who brought happiness and hope to thousands. I do not think that he was a conscious imposter or rogue, except when his wife Emma heard about his sleepmg with Fannie Alger, the young girl who lived with them, and he produced the revelations on polygamy to placate her.</p>
				<p>Kimball Young thinks that Joseph Smith was a parapath, that Is a person who cannot tell fact from fancy.<a href="#note8" id="note-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a></p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Brodie has written about Joseph Smith: “Tolerant of the foibles of his friends, since he could not easily forget his own, he provided a heaven where all men would be saved… Since his wife and children were dear to him, he made the marriage covenant eternal… Since power was sweet to him, he gave to every convert the promise of dominion over a star… He made the frontier evangelist seem by comparison all sound and fury… His people believed the best of him and thereby caused him to give his best.”<a href="#note9" id="note-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> In the section on polygamy I will try to give a sympathetic account of his troubles and glories with the fair sex.</p>
				<p>It could be that God told Joseph to start a new church for the previous ones had defaulted, but that power corrupted him as it has all other rellglous before and since.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4>Mormon Theology</h4>
				<p><abbr class="name">M.R.</abbr> Werner says, “If The Book of Mormon was inspired by God, it was his-second rate work.”<a href="#note10" id="note-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a> I have read it and I find more murder to the page than in the Old Testament, while some of the stories seem thinly disguised from similar incidents in the Bible. Although in Joseph Smlth’s version of that man being called to judgment who calls his brother “a fool,” he gives the spiritual translation which is also given in the Douay Version which the Catholic Church gives, as opposed to the materialistic version of the King James edition which says “without a cause,” which nullifies the whole idea that Christ is trying to bring out.</p>
				<p>Werner further states, “The Book of Mormon is the story of the wanderings of three ancient peoples. One of them, the Jaradites, came directly from the Tower of Babel, and the other two came from Jerusalem or thereabouts. These people after prolonged sufferings, dissentions, and wars, finally arrived on the American continent. The two tribes from Jerusalem were headed by one Lehi, who led his people forth about the year 600 <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>. He died in the wilderness and bequeathed the leadership of the expedition to his youngest son Nephi. But the other brothers disputed their father’s will, and the family split into the Nephites, advocates of the youngest son, and the Lamanites, followers of the oldest son, Laman. There was constant war between these two peoples, and finally the wicked Lamanites wiped out their righteous brother, after both tribes had arrived in America. In 420 <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> the whole American continent was in the possession of the Lamanites, from whom the American Indians are descended. It was the task of Joseph Smith, <abbr>Jr.</abbr> to redeem the continent, which, by the way, is the Promised Land, for the righteous Nephites.”<a href="#note11" id="note-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a></p>
				<p>The Book of Mormon is uninteresting and dull. Even if all this story were true I see little reason for founding a new religion on it. For folks to live a communal life and according to the Word of Wisdom, to come out and be separate is the only way that a religion could stay pure. But the scores of revelations whereby Joseph tried to move people around and to serve his whims certainly came from anyone but divine origin. Their theology is not more far-fetched than others, for all religions have picked up myths and have accommodated themselves to current fetishes and superstitions.</p>
				<p>“In the grand council called to ratify the Father’s plan, a great difference arose. The majority, led by the firstborn of the Father, our elder brother, Jesus the Christ, was ready to accept the plan with all its conditions. The minority, led by Lucifer, a ‘son of the morning,’ feared the isolation and the pains and ills of earth. For them Lucifer proposed that they should be sent to earth, but that provisions should be made by which they would suffer no pain and would not have to make any sacrifices. All of them would be restored with earthly bodies irrespective of their works on earth. Lucifer and his followers were thrown out of the council, and as opponents of God’s plan, became the devil and his angels, who strive ever to tempt men to disobey the laws of God… By the help of Adam, another great spirit in the council, Jesus organized the earth, and to atone for the act that brought man under the ban of death, he himself suffered death. Through Jesus the leader all men upon earth call upon for aid from the Father… our first parents chose life on earth with its inevitable death. That was the fall of man. All men, saints and sinners will be resurrected…”</p>
				<p>“As the eternal intelligences were given a spirit body with which to explore the spiritual world, so this other body was needed as a tool in the exploration of the material world. Eternal progression requires contact and acquaintanceship with the whole universe… in conformity with the free agency bestowed upon all intelligent beings God called a council of the spirits to hear the plan… man must battle with the condltions of earth to whlch his body is subjected. That would foster faith, intelligence, and courage. The evil one would be allowed to range freely upon earth; and man would have to resist temptation. This would discipline the will and turn it into righteous paths. After a short period upon earth, man would be separated from the material body, in the experience called death. However, the body would later be restored to him in a purified state.”<a href="#note12" id="note-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a></p>
				<p>This explanation by Apostle Widstoe, more of a philosopher than most Mormon writers, is included here as being the clearest that I have found. In contrast to Brigham Young who continually talked about sending people who argued with him “cross lots to hell,” Widstoe says, “There can be no talk of hell… except for the very few sons of perdition, but undoubtedly the regret for lost opportunities will be keen among those in the lower degrees of glory.”<a href="#note13" id="note-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a> I have heard a Jesuit priest say that there was a hell but you couldn’t prove that any one was in it except the devil, and as far as heaven went we have the word of Christ that the Good Thief would see him that day in Paradise. Whether this was a preliminary entrance into heaven we will let the theologians discuss. Widstoe continues, “A religion without a hell seemed impossible to the misled preachers of Joseph’s day. The law of progress continues in full operation for every soul throughout eternity… all blemishes and imperfections will be corrected before the unending unity of body and spirit takes place… The dead retain in the spirit world the power to learn, to understand, and to choose. Did not Jesus say he was going to preach to the ‘spirits in prison?’” And it is this baptism for the dead, which like the prayers of Catholics for souls in purgatory that helps those who are dead.<a href="#note14" id="note-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a></p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4>Adam-God Theory</h4>
				<p>“While Adam and Eve in Joseph Smith’s philosophy were raised to a foremost place among the children of men second only to the Savior. Their act was to be acclaimed.”<a href="#note15" id="note-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a> It remained for Brigham Young to bring the Adam-God theory forth, which is not mentioned by Mormons much today. Efforts have been made to explain it away, but on April 9, 1852 he gave his famous Adam-God sermon:</p>
				<p>“When our father Adam came into the Garden of Eden, he came into it with a <em>celestial body</em>, and brought Eve, one of his wives, with him. He helped to make and organize this world… He is our Father and our God, and only God with whom we have to do.” This created quite a stir and in defending Brigham the headline in <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">The Millenial Star</i> of <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 10, 1853 had this assertion. “Adam Is Really God! And Why Not?”</p>
				<p>This would seem bad enough but in his same April 9th, 1852 speech Brigham said: “When the Virgin Mary conceived the child Jesus, the Father had begotten him in his own likeness. He was not begotten by the Holy Ghost. And who is the Father? He is the first of the human family… Jesus, our elder brother, was begotten in the flesh by the same character that was in the Garden of Eden, and who is our Father in Heaven. Now let all who may hear these doctrines, pause before they make light of them, or treat them with indifference, for they will prove their salvation or damnation” (<i epub:type="se:name:publication">Journal of Discourses</i> <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 1, Pages 50–51). Widstoe makes a distinction between the Holy Spirit and the Holy Ghost: “The Holy Spirit or ‘the light of truth’ is the spirit that proceeds from ‘the presence of God to fill the immensity of space.’ It is manifested in all natural phenomena. It penetrates all men. By its agency, the Lord may communicate with man, and may receive help from God. The Holy Ghost, on the other hand, is a Personage, the third member of the Godhead, to whom has been committed many important phases of the plan of salvation… prophecy, healing and the gift of tongues.”<a href="#note16" id="note-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a></p>
				<p>Werner says that “On <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 16, 1832 Smith and Rigdon saw Christ who told them that there were three orders of eternal bliss. The Celestial (Sun) order was conferred only on devout believers such as Smith, Rigdon, and their most faithful followers… the Terrestial (Moon) order, consisting of those who had received the testimony of Jesus after they had died… and the Telestial (Earth) order came one grade below and consisted of people who had never accepted the testimony of Jesus, such as the Jews, who would only be saved from eternal damnation in the resurrection.”<a href="#note17" id="note-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> (Sun, Moon, Earth) inserted by author.</p>
				<p>By 1844 Joseph had developed the idea of many gods which was not in The Book of Mormon. Neither was the cardinal principle of baptism for the dead in The Book of Mormon. Of course God could make new revelations, which is also a part of Mormon principle that He is an evolving God; that He was once man, and that we will come to be God, which is another mixture.</p>
				<p>Here Brodie sums up Mormon theology by saying, “What Joseph had created was essentially an evangelical socialism, which made up in moral strength what it lacked in grandeur. Nearly every man had New Testament title—deacon, teacher, priest, elder, ‘seventy,’ or bishop. Each title carried a certain rank, progression from lower to higher being dependent upon a man’s faith, his zeal for the church, and the goodwill of his superiors in the hierarchy.”<a href="#note18" id="note-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a></p>
				<p>One of the most objective accounts of the Mormons was made by an Englishman, Richard Burton, who visited Salt Lake City in 1859 and wrote <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The City of Saints</i>. He says: “The Mormons are like the Pythagorians in their procreation, transmigration, and exhaltation of souls; like the followers of Leucippus and Democratus in their atomic materialism; like the Epicurians in their pure atomic theories, their summum bonum, and their sensuous speculations; and like the Platonists and Gnostics in their belief of the Aeon, of ideas, and of moving principles in element. They are fetichists in their ghostly fancies, their <i>evestra</i>, which became souls and spirits. They are Jews in their theocracy, their ideas of angels, their hatred of Gentiles, and their utter segregation from their great brotherhood of mankind. They are Christians inasmuch as they base their faith upon the Bible, and hold to the divinity of Christ, the fall of man, the atonement, and regeneration. They are Arians inasmuch as they hold Christ to be ‘the first of God’s creatures’ a ‘perfect creature but still a creature.’ They are Moslems in their views of the inferior status of womankind, in their polygamy, and in their resurrection of the material body; like the followers of the Arabian prophet, they hardly fear death, because they have elaborated ‘continuation.’ They take no leap in the dark; they spring from this sublunary stage into a known, not into an unknown world.”<a href="#note19" id="note-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a></p>
				<p>As to the mechanics of Joseph’s revelations it is possible that he received word from God to start the real Church; but that prankster spirits gave him dimensions of buildings, advice as to whom to trust and whom to expel; that he had a gift to receive something similar to automatic writing, or even “hunches” as Edgar Cayce in our own generation received. And, as will be shown in the section on polygamy, it is plain that when Emma heard about his cohabitation with the two young girls in his household, that in defense he made up regulations to placate her, disguised as revelations from God. In contrast Brigham Young said that Joseph had had enough revelations and he did not need to give many, but when anyone contradicted him he said he was inspired and should be obeyed or, “I will unsheathe my bowie knife,” “we will slay them,” “cut their throats,” their heads chopped off…”<a href="#note20" id="note-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a> <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul at times said he was inspired and at other times spoke “of himself.” Mohammed had epileptic fits and it has been said that this was “mine infirmity” of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul. Joseph’s grandfather Mack had them and it has been said that Joseph had them but outgrew them. This does not prove anything, except that it might have been that in some seizure he had visions.</p>
				<p><abbr class="name">I.</abbr> Woodbridge Riley, in a scholarly work published by Dodd, Mead, <abbr>Co.</abbr> entitled <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Founder of Mormonism</i> in 1902 said that Joseph suffered from a form of epilepsy inherited from his grandfather but that he outgrew these “trances” by the time he was 30. He says, “Smith’s method was so far the commonplace method of the trance medium. The act of fixing the eyes on one particular point [as the peepstone in his hat. ―<abbr class="name">A.H.</abbr>], supplimented by a state of quietitude through prayer, prepared the way for the influence of self-suggestion. His external acts are one thing, the subtle and self deceiving nature of his hallucinations another. He knew no more about the subconscious self and the law of association of ideas, than he did of the fact that his ‘Reformed Egyptian’ resembled the irregular and spasmodic writings of hypnotic subjects.” Riley also felt that in 1844 when he was at the height of his meglomania in military uniform his utterance as follows was psychotic: “I know more than all the world put together. I combat the error of ages.”</p>
				<p>I also read the Biographical Sketches of his mother Lucy Mack Smith, published in Liverpool, England in 1853, which told of his digging for treasure. This has been edited out of recent editions of the life of Joseph Smith.</p>
				<p>The effort of the Church historian Hugh Nibley in his booklet <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">No Ma’am, That’s Not History</i>, published in 1946 by Bookcraft in Salt Lake City is a pitiful attempt to answer Fawn Brodie’s book <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">No Man Knows My History</i>.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4>Brigham Young</h4>
				<p>His family was the poorest in the frontier town where he was born in New England, June 1, 1801. They did not have a horse, cow, or any land. His father made a living as a basket maker. His father had been in the revolutionary army and was very strict; “It was a word and a blow but the blow came first,”<a href="#note21" id="note-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a> Brigham said. Brigham had but 11 days of formal schooling; but he could take a clock apart and put it together again. He was very handy in many trades and made his living as a painter and glazier, but quit because it was a common practice to adulterate paint and cheat, and he wouldn’t do it. He was very independent and didn’t like to be pushed around. When his father wanted him to take the temperance pledge he said to him, “No sir, if I sign a temperance pledge I feel that I am bound, and I wish to do just right, without being bound to it; I want my liberty.”<a href="#note22" id="note-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a></p>
				<p>His sister and brother had read the Book of Mormon and accepted it, having received it as a gift from Joseph’s brother William, but it took him two years to make up his mind. He was baptized a Mormon April 14, 1832 at Mendon, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> but he had not yet met Joseph Smith. When he did he commenced to speak in tongues. When he was young, two of his best friends were Henry Wells, the founder of Wells Fargo Express Company, and Isaac Singer, inventor of the Sewing machine.</p>
				<p>He had married Miriam Works with whom he had two daughters, Vilate and Elizabeth. She was baptized into the Church shortly before she died of tuberculosis. Later he married thirty year old Mary Ann Angell. When he came to Kirtland, Ohio he turned over all of his property to the Church, and when five years later he was driven out he had nothing.</p>
				<p>He was on a mission in Boston when Joseph was murdered, and he came back to Nauvoo just in time to prevent the dour and fanatical Sydney Rigdon from taking over the Church. When he was speaking to the Mormons, the story goes that he grew in stature and his voice changed so that he resembled the martyred Joseph. He persuaded those assembled to have the Council of 12 rule the Church, but he was not elected Prophet and second President until December 1847 in Salt Lake City. Emma never recognized him, saying that Joseph had said that his son was to rule the Church, but the boy was then too young. Brigham commenced to finish the Temple where he and others would be sealed to wives, and to prepare the emigrating to the west. He took over some of Joseph’s wives, but not Emma, the first being the poetess Eliza Snow. Emma later married a non-Mormon, <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Bideman, and they ran a tavern in Nauvoo.</p>
				<p>Corning across the plains he was everywhere organizing families into tens and hundreds, planning singing and dances to keep up the spirit, planting seed for food at Winter Quarters, and going ahead with a smaller group to seek The Promised Land. One man grumbled a lot and Brigham announced that all who had complaints should bring them to this man and he would shout them forth as Chief Grumbler. This shut him up.</p>
				<p>These Mormons were from the poorer classes in England, Scotland, and Wales and although they were called Latter-day Saints, it is obvious that many came to escape misery, and as the saying goes, “for the loaves and fishes,” except that these were scarce on the plains. Someone had to be the Moses to lead them and he had to feel that he was called by the Lord to do so. When the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Government called for 500 soldiers to go to California, Brigham saw that the money they got would help the others so the 500 soon volunteered. It happened that his prophecy was fulfilled when he told them, “I promise you in the name of Israel’s God that not a man of you will fall in battle,”<a href="#note23" id="note-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a> for they did not get into the Mexican War. He told the men also, “If you are sick, live by faith, and let the surgeon’s medicine alone if you want to live.”<a href="#note24" id="note-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a> Saying he himself would rather die a natural death than be helped out by a Doctor.<a href="#note25" id="note-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a> He said, “Let the sick do without eating, take a little something to cleanse the stomach, bowels, and blood, and wait patiently, and let nature have time to gain the advantage over the disease.”<a href="#note26" id="note-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a> A Doctor had written to Brigham from the East asking what the prospects were. Brigham answered him. “The Mormons thought little of one who could not build his own house, irrigate his own land, and raise up a crop of wheat, corn, beans, peas, and potatoes. If the Doctor wanted to come under these conditions he would be made welcome, but if he had any thought of accumulating wealth, he would be wasting his time.”<a href="#note27" id="note-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a></p>
				<p>Just as he could organize the trek across the plains so could he organize the many wives and 56 children of his household. Anyone who was late missed the meal, as a warning bell rang 5 minutes before the meal. His children did not have to go to Church on Sunday but they couldn’t play games, ride horses, or sew doll clothing. True to his New England tradition he was against gambling. And he organized the women to glean the fields for wheat and corn for the poor. Naturally he was pestered by folks who asked his advice. He told them “not to ask for counsel when they were sure they were not going to take it.” He could hand it out but he could also take it, for when he had tongue lashed a Bishop in public he told him to keep his temper and not leave the Church. The Bishop answered, “Don’t worry brother Brigham, this is just as much my Church as it is yours.”<a href="#note28" id="note-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a> At that Brigham chuckled. Once a one-legged man asked him to pray for another leg for him. Brigham answered that he might do so but what was the use for when he was resurrected he would have to have three legs and be in a worse predlcament. The man hobbled away satisfied.<a href="#note29" id="note-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a> The English traveler Burton describes Brigham speaking at the Tabernacle: “He sat with his high hat on when he came to the platform. When he took his hat off that old man held his cough; that old lady awoke with a start; that child ceased to squall. Brigham bent over and expectorated in a spittoon, he took a slow drink of water, and commenced to speak powerfully and extemporaneously.”<a href="#note30" id="note-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a> He did not keep pigs and never ate pork. He told his wives to give the children milk and hard bread for breakfast, no meat, and plenty of fruits and vegetables.<a href="#note31" id="note-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a></p>
				<p>Tom Thumb visited Salt Lake City and met Brigham and said that he didn’t understand “about this here polygamy.” Brigham told him not to worry for when he was his size he couldn’t understand it either.”<a href="#note32" id="note-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a></p>
				<p>A woman came up to Brigham crying and said her husband told her to go to hell. He looked at her solemnly and said “Well, don’t go; don’t go.”<a href="#note33" id="note-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a> When his 51st child was born he rushed home from a trip to be present at the birth. She, Clarissa, tells of getting two pigeons each morning from the pigeon house, and turning her back while the overseer wrung their necks. This was for her father’s breakfast. He only ate two meals a day. This is the recipe for his only hot drink. It has been variously spoken of as Brigham tea or Mormon tea: 4 <abbr>oz.</abbr> each of ground bayberry, poplar bark and hemlock; 2 <abbr>oz.</abbr> each of ground ginger, cloves, and cinnamon; and one ounce of cayenne pepper. This would surely be a <em>hot</em> drink. He would not have his hair cut, but had it singed by barber Squires.<a href="#note34" id="note-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a> This is the grandfather of a Jack Mormon friend of mine here, who is also a barber. He reads the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and the <i epub:type="se:name:publication">National Guardian</i>. On December 9, 1850 the Territorial Legislature passed a blll giving Brigham Young control of City Creek and Canyon on the payment of $500. This was clearly a monoply.<a href="#note35" id="note-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a></p>
				<p>Water and wood were made public property when Salt Lake City was set up. Land was given by lot and the blocks were made large so that no one need be cramped; a bachelor got nothing, but a man with more than one wife could get land for an extra house. Brigham said: “We have no land to sell to the Saints in the Great Basin, but you are entitled to as much as you can till, or as you need for your support provided you pay the surveyor for his services, while he is laboring for you; and at a future day will receive your inheritances on the farming lands as well as in city lots; and none of you have any land to buy or sell more than ourselves; for the inheritance is of the Lord, and we are his servants, to see that everyone has his portion in due season.”<a href="#note36" id="note-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a> Brigham did not tarry but went east to Winter Quarters to help the next group get along. Once when religious services were being held, word came that emigrants were arriving. He at once dismissed the meeting and told the women to get hot food for them. They could always pray and sing but now was the time to feed the hungry.</p>
				<p>After a few years there came a Reformation and a listening to the Word of Wisdom which said that no tobacco or liquor should be used and that men should not lead immoral lives. One of the leaders was Jedediah Grant, father of Heber Grant, who later became President of the Church. At a meeting Brigham arose, and asked all members present who had committed adultery to stand up. To his surprise and chagrin three fourths of them got to their feet. A Bishop arose and asked if the men had not misunderstood Brother Brigham’s question. He thought that the elders did not understand that the question referred only to the time since they had repented of sin and joined the Church… but when put to them again… the men all remained on their feet.”<a href="#note37" id="note-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a></p>
				<p>Captain Van Vliet said that Brigham kept his people captive so he offered to provide free transportation and the best of supplies to anyone who desired to leave Utah territory, on the condition that the government would provide similar means to all those in the East who wished to migrate to Utah. The Captain was won over and said he would resign from the Army rather than molest the Mormons.”<a href="#note38" id="note-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a> “Winter saints” were those who came with a stock of goods from the East and only stayed long enough to sell them and depart. A certain Mormon in another small town had a vacant lot that he was not using. One day he saw a man building a house on it and asked him “how come?” The man said the Bishop had told him to build there, for nothing could be held not in use or for speculation. The owner asked the Bishop by what authority he did this and he went away satisfied with the reply: “By the authority of the Priesthood of God.”<a href="#note39" id="note-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a> And a fellow who charged high prices for corn was told to refund the overcharge “or his head might roll in the snow.” He made the deal right.</p>
				<p>In 1857, jealous politicians and clergy persuaded President Buchanan to send 2,500 troops to put down the “rebellious Mormons.” Brigham sent young Lot Smith with his guerillas to burn the fields, destroy everything in the path of the troops, scatter their cattle and horses, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Finally some Army Commissioners came to protest. Brigham had already moved nearly 40,000 people south to Provo, leaving only a skeleton crew to set fiire to the city if the troops entered. Before thousands in the Tabernacle he told the Commissioners: “What has the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> government permitted mobs to do to us in the past? Gentlemen, you can answer that question for yourselves… we have been plundered and whipped, and our houses have been burned, our fathers mothers, brothers, sisters, and children butchered and murdered by the score. We have been driven from our homes time and time again; but have troops ever been sent to stay or punish the mobs for their crimes? No. Have we ever received a dollar for the property that we have been compelled to leave behind? Not a dollar. Let the government of our country treat us as we deserve. That is all we ask of them. We have always been loyal and expect to continue so. But hands off! Do not send your armed mobs into our midst. If you do we will fight you, as the Lord lives… if you bring your troops here to disturb the people… Before the troops reach here, this city will be in ashes, every tree and shrub will be cut to the ground, and every blade of grass that will burn will be burned. Our wives and children will go into the canyons and take shelter in the mountains; while their husbands and sons will fight you to their last breath. And as God lives, we will hunt you by night and day til our army or yours is wasted away… if you want war you can have it; but if you wish peace, peace it is.”<a href="#note40" id="note-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a> Then the thousands of Mormons sang the rousing song “Zion.” Soon the army marched through the deserted town and 40 miles away set up a camp. Brigham used magnificent strategy and won.</p>
				<p>In the sections on Blood Atonement and on Polygamy I will deal with aspects of Brigham’s character and of his beliefs which savor of Old Testament vengeance; and in the section on the United Order I will tell of his idea of the Kingdom of God on earth. Brigham held property as trustee in trust for the Church and also had business of his Own. Godbe, a merchant, left the Church because Brigham crowded him in business, and the four Walker brothers would not pay tithe and were also crowded by Brigham, and they left the Church and started the Walker Bank, which even today has a huge sign seen for miles. It was this attainment of power which made enemies for the Church and led to the oppressive laws from Washington, <abbr class="postal eoc">D.C.</abbr> As in Nauvoo, the destruction of the press of the opponents of Joseph Smith brought the mob down on him, so here this monoply stirred up envy among the politicians and clergy. Brigham was not a theologian yet he came forth with some wild ideas that were not in the Book of Mormon. He was primarily an organizer and statesman; an honest and upright man in most of his dealings. The Church has produced no one since his death with a modicum of his fearlessness, or with a tenth of his ability. Despite his greatness he ordered that no monument be placed over his grave; just a flat stone. So north of where East Second Street South begins, off First Avenue there is an enclosed graveyard with Brigham’s grave and the graves of several of his Wives. However, when thousands of tourists come to see the Temple and the Square, the huge statue of Brigham Young stands with hand and arm stretched out to the Bank, and with his back to the Temple. This is joked about by Gentiles to suggest the worship of wealth by the Mormon Church today, but the members of other churches do not come with clean hands and they, as the Indians say, speak with forked tongues, for all churches worship Mammon, and do so not in the name of latter day prophets and martyrs, but in the name of that Christ who drove the money changers from the Temple.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4>Blood Atonement</h4>
				<p>From the 4th Chapter of First Nephi where Zoram slays Laban, through the whole Book of Mormon to the next to last chapter of Moroni there is more bloodshed, treachery, cannibalism, and ungodliness to the page than you can find in our Old Testament, notwithstanding that many of the words of Christ are paraphrased and His parables given in different settings, and He says that He comes to supercede the law of Moses and brings the Sermon on the Mount, and the people do live in peace and brotherhood for generations until they again become corrupted. Despite all these warnings of what comes to those of evil heart who seek vengeance, Brigham Young emphasized the necessity of the shedding of blood to atone for sins. It would seem that the death of Christ on the Cross was of no avail.</p>
				<p>In 1893, William Smith, Joseph Smith’s brother, testified in court as follows: “I left Nauvoo in 1845 because my life was in danger if I remained there, because of my objections and protests against the doctrine of Blood Atonement.”<a href="#note41" id="note-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a> In a debate with George <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Smith, who advocated imprisonment rather than hanging, Joseph Smith says: “I was opposed to hanging, even if a man kill another. I will shoot him, or cut off his head, spill his blood on the ground, and let the smoke thereof ascend up to God; and if I ever have the privilege of making a law on that subject, I will have it so.”<a href="#note42" id="note-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></p>
				<p>And Brigham said, “Suppose you found your brother in bed with your wife, and put a javelin through both of them, you would be justified, and they would atone for their sins, and be received into the kingdom of God. I would at once do so in such a case; and under such circumstances. I have no wife whom I love so well that I would not put a javelin through her heart, and I would do it with clean hands.” And “if you want to know what to do with a thief that you may find stealing, I say kill them on the spot, and never suffer him to commit another iniquity… I know this appears hard… if you will cause all those whom you know to be thieves to be placed in a line before the mouth of one of our largest cannon, well loaded with chain shot, I will prove by my works whether I can mete out justice to such persons, or not. I would consider it just as much my duty to do that, as to baptize a man for the remission of his sins. That is a short discourse on thieves, I acknowledge, but I tell you the truth as it is in my heart.” (<i epub:type="se:name:publication">Journal of Discourses</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 1, pages 108–109)</p>
				<p>And in the Temple, February 8, 1857, Brigham said: “This is loving our neighbor as ourselves; if he needs help, help him; and if he wants salvation and it is necessary to spill his blood on the earth in order that he may be saved, spill it… that is the way to love mankind.” And again Brigham said: “I could refer you to plenty of instances where men have been righteously slain, in order to atone for their sins.” (<i epub:type="se:name:publication">Journal of Discourses</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 1, pages 108–109)</p>
				<p>In 1857 troops of the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Army were headed toward Utah. A migrant train of 150 well-armed and well-loaded folks from Arkansas came toward California. They were told to hurry westward and not to go the southern route. Attached to them were a few boisterous “Missouri Wildcats,” one of whom boasted that he had the very gun that killed “Old Joe Smith.” They would pass through towns and seeing chickens along the road would snap their heads off with their long snake-like whips. George <abbr>A.</abbr> Smith went ahead of them telling the Mormons not to sell any produce to this group. Finally they camped near Cedar City at a place called Mountain Meadows. Bishop Haight and <abbr>Col.</abbr> Dame met and as the ecclesiastical, and Army or Militia leaders, decided that the blood of the Prophet should be avenged. The Francher train was too well armed and could not be overcome without much loss of Mormon men, so it was decided to inflame the Indians to surprise them. This was done, but a few white men helped and the Mormon leaders did not want word to get out that they had had anything to do with it, so to cover up it was decided to bring a white flag and call for a truce, and then murder them all at a certain signal. John <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Lee, as farmer to the Indians, went along and he saw men, women, and children killed, but 17 children of tender age were saved and later sent back to Arkansas. The murderers took a solemn oath not to divulge their bloody deed. Brigham sent word not to harm the Francher party, but it was his bloodthirsty talk all these years that built up this episode. The Gentiles over the country made a great fuss about it. Warrants were made out for the leaders for years, but they hid away. John <abbr>D.</abbr> Lee had been at Nauvoo and was an adopted son of Brigham. He colonized southern Utah and Lee’s Ferry at the Colorado River was named after him. He had 19 wives and 64 children. Without a word and in the midst of his work for the Church he was excommunicated and most of his wives left him. Haight and Dame were out of the country and it is supposed that Brigham knew Lee would be caught in time and if he was to be the scapegoat then it were better that he not be a member of the Church when arrested. He was tried and offered immunity if he would implicate the Church but he would not do so, being true to his oath taken after the massacre. I read his two volume diary and the book about him by Juanita Brooks of the Utah Historical Society. When Lee was excommunicated, Brigham said that “under no circumstances should he ever be admitted as a member again.”<a href="#note43" id="note-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a></p>
				<p>To placate the Gentiles an all-Mormon jury found Lee guilty and sentenced him to be shot. He had been out on bail and a messenger from the Church, telling him to skip bail and it would be paid, did not reach him in time. Lee felt that he had spilled innocent blood and that the only way he could atone for it was by shedding his own blood, so I doubt if he would have fled if he had received the message in time. He was shot near his coffin and grave at Mountain Meadows on March 13, 1877. Before being executed he said, in part: “It seems that I have to be made a victim—a victm must be had, and I am the victim. I am a true believer in the gospel of Jesus Christ. I do not believe everything that is now being taught and practiced by Brigham Young. I do not care who hears it. I studied to make this man’s will my pleasure for thirty years. See, now, what I have come to this day! I have been sacrificed in a cowardly, dastardly manner. What confidence can I have in such a man (Brigham)! I have none, and I don’t think my father in heaven has any!”<a href="#note43" id="note-43a" epub:type="noteref">43</a></p>
				<p>And five months and six days later Brigham was dead. The lawsuit of his last wife, Ann Eliza, coupled with the guilt he must have felt because the reputation of a Church must be secure even by the betrayal of a friend, must have lessened his will to live. It is a black mark upon his character.</p>
				<p>But somehow truth comes out, so despite Brigham’s command, on Thursday, April 20, 1961, the First Presidency and the Quorum of Twelve met in a joint session and “It was the action of the Council after considering all the facts available that authorization be given for the re-instatement to membership and former blessings to John <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Lee.” “On May 8 and 9 following the necessary ordinances were performed in the Salt Lake Temple.”<a href="#note44" id="note-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a></p>
				<p>It only took the Mormons 85 years to admit their error; it took the Catholics 400 years to make Joan of Arc a saint. And no penitance has yet been shown for the <abbr>St.</abbr> Bartholomew Day massacre of thousands of Protestants by the Catholics, although the advent of the Worker Priests of unhappy memory was perhaps a gesture in the cosmic plan to be interpreted as always by mercenary clerics.</p>
				<p>Brigham said “If a white man steals shoot him. If an Indian steals teach him better.” Brigham said of laws: “Strip a justice of all the legal mists and fog which surround him in this day and age; leave him no nook or corner of precedent, or common law ambiguous enactments, the accumulation of the ages, wherein to shelter, and it is my opinion that unrighteous decisions would seldom be given.”</p>
				<p>The first murder trial in Utah was that of Howard Egan in 1851 for killing a man whom he caught in bed with his wife. His lawyer argued that if he had not done this he would have shared his wife’s guilt and by killing the man he wiped the slate clean. He was acquitted with honor, for had he not been an instrument in “blood atonement.”</p>
				<p>The laws in early Utah were also bloody, the first four ordinances of the High Council providing 39 lashes for stealing, or being “disorderly or dangerous” and for adultry or fornication. The General Assembly on December 2, 1850, in Section 10 declared that in the case of murder, “he, she, or they shall suffer death, by being shot, hung, or beheaded.” None was ever beheaded, as each one sentenced could choose the method by which they were to be executed. A thief had to pay back fourfold, according to Section 28.<a href="#note45" id="note-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a></p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4>Polygamy</h4>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“Wherefore, my brethern, hear me, and hearken to the word of the Lord; for there shall not any man among you have save it be one wife; and concubines he shall have none.” Jacob 2:27 Book of Mormon</p>
					<p>“Inasmuch as this church of Christ has been reproached with the crime of fornication, and polygamy: we declare that we believe, that one man should have one wife; and one woman, one husband, except in the case of death, when either is at liberty to marry again.” First edition of Doctrine and Covenants section 101:4, printed in 1835, but taken out in 1876 and <abbr>Sec.</abbr> 132 on plurality of wives put in its place.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p><i>Revelation of Plural Marriage, July 12, 1843 in Nauvoo.</i> Joseph’s secretary, <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Clayton states: “Joseph and Hyrum Smith came into the office… they were talking on the subject of plural marriage. Hyrum said to Joseph, ‘If you will write the revelation on celestial marriage, I will take it and read it to Emma, and I believe that I can convince her of its truth, and you will hereafter have peace.’ Joseph smiled and remarked. ‘You do not know Emma as well as I do.’ Joseph then said, ‘Well, I will write the revelation and we will see.’… Hyrum then took the revelation to read to Emma. Joseph remained with me in the office until Hyrum returned. When he came back, Joseph asked him how he had succeeded. Hyrum replied that he had never received a more severe talking to in his life.” (<i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">History of the Church</i>, by Joseph Smith, Introduction to <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 5)</p>
				<p>On August 29, 1852 Orson Pratt first publicly announced that the Mormon Church believed in plural marriage. This was in Salt Lake City.</p>
				<p>Brigham Young said: “Now if any of you will deny the plurality of wives and continue to do so, I promise that you will be damned.”<a href="#note46" id="note-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a></p>
				<p>Wilford Woodruff said in June of 1879, “I will not desert my wives and children and disobey the commandments of God for the sake of accommodating the public clamor of a nation seeped in sin and ripened for the damnation of hell. I would rather go to prison and to death.”<a href="#note47" id="note-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a></p>
				<p>Lorenzo Snow, Fifth President of the Church, said, “The severest prosecutions have never been followed by revelations changing a divine law, obedience to which brought imprisonment or martrydom. Though I go to prison, God will not change his law of celestial marriage.”<a href="#note48" id="note-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a></p>
				<p><i>Polygamy renounced by President Woodruff, September 24, 1890, and ratified by the Church by the General Conference October 6th.</i> “I Charles Penrose, wrote the Manifesto, with the assistance of Frank Cannon and John White, and it is no revelation from God, for I wrote it, and Wilford Woodruff signed it to beat the devil at his own game. Brethren God has not withdrawn this everlasting principle, or revoked it, for how can he revoke or withdraw an everlasting principle?” (This statement made at an Elders Conference, in London in 1908, and reprinted in the January 1929 issue of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Truth</i>.)</p>
				<p>This is Woodruff’s revelation: “The Lord showed me by vision and revelation exactly what would happen if we did not stop this practice… all ordinances would be stopped… many men would be made prisoners… I went before the Lord, and I wrote what the Lord told me to write.” In part “Inasmuch as laws have been enacted by Congress forbidding plural marriages, which laws have been pronounced constitutional by the court of last resort, I hereby declare my intention to submit to those laws, and to use my influence with the members of the Church over which I preside to have them do likewise. There is nothing in my teachings to the Church or in those of my associates, during the time specified, which can be reasonably construed to inculcate or encourage polygamy; and when any Eider of the Church has used language which appeared to convey any such teaching he has been promptly reproved. And I now publicly declare that my advice to the Latter-day Saints is to refrain from contracting any marriage firbidden by the law of the land.”</p>
				<p>On October 6, President Lorenzo Snow offered the following: “I move that, recognizing Wilford Woodruff as the President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and the only man on the earth at the present time who holds the keys of the sealing ordinances, we consider him fully authorized by virtue of his position to issue the Manifesto which has been read in our hearing, and which is dated September 24th, 1890, and that as a Church in General Conference assembled, we accept his declaration concerning plural marriages as authoritative and binding.” The vote to sustain the foregoing was unanimous. 10-6-1890. Page 257 Doctrine and Covenants.</p>
				<p>
					<i>The Second anti-polygamy Manifesto—April 3, 1904, by President Joseph F. Smith, prohibiting all plural marriages.</i>
				</p>
				<p>Verse 26 of the 132nd section of the Doctrine and Covenants teaches that only by the shedding of one’s blood may he atone for murder. It is no wonder that in the Mormon-dominated Legislature of 1962–63 a bill to abolish capital punishment did not get to first base. Seeking to be respectable the Mormon Church does not openly preach “blood atonement” these days any more than it advocates the old “Adam-God” theory, but these ancient bloodthirsty beliefs keep them from being true Christians.</p>
				<p>The reader will now have a background to follow in detail—this story of deceit, bravery, and cowardice on the subject of polygamy. When the average person thinks of the Mormons he thinks of polygamy, and unless this subject is dealt with clearly and fully there is no understanding of the Mormons.</p>
				<p>To begin with I should state that I have read the Booklet issued by the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Independence, <abbr class="postal">Mo.</abbr> entitled <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Joseph Smith Was Not a Polygamist</i>. Because Emma would not admit anything about his wives or the revelation on polygamy shown to her by Hyrum Smith, and because there is not a court record of any marriages this Church denies that Joseph Smith ever thought of polygamy. A person either has to believe this flimsy evidence or that of scores of people who knew Joseph and his wives. I believe the latter.</p>
				<p>Here is the evidence to prove that Joseph had many wives before he dared to tell Emma about it. In the testimony in the Temple, Lot Case page 320–321, Lorenzo Snow, Fifth President of the Mormon Church said that Joseph Smith sealed or married his sister Eliza in April of 1843 and the revelation on polygamy was July, 1843. Benjamin <abbr class="name">F.</abbr> Johnson stated, “As I could not long be absent from my home and business, we soon returned to Ramus. On the 15th day of May some three weeks later the Prophet again came and at my home occupied the same room and bed, with my sister, that the month previous he had occupied with the daughter of the late Bishop Partridge as his wife.”<a href="#note49" id="note-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a> Emily Partridge relates as follows (from <i epub:type="se:name:publication">Historical Record</i>, page 240) “The Prophet Joseph and his wife Emma offered us a home in their family, and they treated us with great kindness. We had been there about a year when the principle of plural marriage was made known to us, and I was married to Joseph Smith on the 4th of March 1843, Elder Heber <abbr class="name">C.</abbr> Kimball performing the ceremony. My sister Eliza was also married to Joseph a few days later. This was done without the knowledge of Emma Smith. Two months afterwards she consented to give her husband two wives, providing he would give her the privilege of choosing them. She accordingly chose my sister Eliza and myself, and to save family trouble Brother Joseph thought it best to have another ceremony performed. Accordingly on the 11th of May, 1843 we were sealed to Joseph Smith a second time, in Emma’s presence… From that very hour, however, Emma was our bitter enemy. We remained in the family several months after this, but things went from bad to worse until we were obligated to leave the house and find another home.”</p>
				<p>John <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Lee was many times a bodyguard of Smith when he went to sleep for a few hours with his young wives.<a href="#note50" id="note-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a> Records of the Nauvoo Temple show those women sealed to Joseph Smith. Lucinda Morgan Harris was the wife of William Morgan who was murdered for revealing Masonic secrets. Then she married George Harris but Joseph slept with her off and on for four years and Harris was present when she was sealed to Joseph in January 1846. Prescinda Buell visited Joseph twice at Far West jail. Her husband left the Church and she said she was not sure whether Buell or Joseph was the father of her son Oliver. Erastus Snow said that “my wife’s sister, Louisa Beman, was his (Joseph’s) first plural wife, she being sealed to him by my brother-in-law, Joseph <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> Noble, April 5, 1841.” Zina Jacobs lived with Joseph while her husband was on a mission. After Joseph’s death she left Jacobs and married Brigham Young. Mary Lightner married a non-Mormon but gives a sworn statement that she was sealed to Joseph “in the Masonic Hall, over the old brick store by Brigham Young in February 1842 and then again in the Nauvoo Temple by Heber <abbr class="name">C.</abbr> Kimball.” She bore Lightner ten children, although one of them might have been Joseph’s, and lived to be 95. Eliza Snow married Joseph at the age of 38, June 29, 1842, Brigham Young performing the ceremony. Later he married many single girls, but he seems to have picked on the wives of his friends. In Utah when polygamy was above board there does not seem to be any marrying to others than virgins. The above data is from Fawn Brodie’s <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">No Man Knows My History</i>, and from Tanner’s <i epub:type="se:name:publicatin:book">Mormonism</i>.</p>
				<p>I am not going into detail about Brigham’s wives other than to mention that he was a very busy man and romance did not seem to be a part of his nature, procreating being a part of his duty. Werner writes that Brigham Young, <abbr>Jr.</abbr> and his father both courted Lizzie Fenton but the boy got her.<a href="#note51" id="note-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a> But at the age of 61 he became passionately in love with Amelia Folsom, cousin to Grover Cleveland’s wife. She was 25 and when he married her she insisted on a house of her own, and until that was built she ate at a table alone with Brigham, and he escorted her all over town. She never had any children. He sent a rival on a mission. There were no lame, deformed or blind children among his 56 children. There were three sets of twins.<a href="#note52" id="note-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a></p>
				<p>One excuse for polygamy often given is that there were more females than males in Utah, but this is not true. For in those days one census showed 5,055 more males than females. George Bernard Shaw gives a better explanation: “Polygamy when tried under modern democratic conditions, as by the Mormons, is wrecked by the revolt of the mass of inferior men who are condemned to celibacy by it; for the maternal instinct leads a woman to prefer a tenth share in a first rate man to the exclusive possession of a third rate.” In fact it was only the more prosperous and more responsible men who attempted polygamy. At any time not more than 10% of the Mormons practiced it.</p>
				<p>The one best book on the subject is <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Isn’t One Wife Enough?</i> by Kimball Young, the grandson of Brigham Young. The only defect in it is that he told nothing of his own childhood in a polygamous family. He was head of the Department of Sociology at Northwestern University, and made a case history of 175 polygamous families and gives numerous illustrations of how it all worked out. He had doubts about the truth of Joseph’s revelations. He found 53% were successful, a fourth moderately successful, 23% had considerable conflict. Nearly half were in a high economic level, one third medium, and one-sixth were poor.</p>
				<p>He tells of the first wife, who, if her husband was sleeping next door with his second wife, and did not get up early enough to suit her, would awaken him by throwing stones on the roof. In another family where they all lived in one house, as the children grew older all the boys would sleep in one big room and all the girls in another, no matter who the mother was. He tells of one family where the father and mother were much in love, and the two wives he married were a matter of duty to “live the principle.” These wives were engaged to young men but they liked the old man whom they wanted enough to live in polygamy. All these wives had the same ideas of desire for an education, a beautiful and peaceful home. The new wives were aggressive but the first wife didn’t mind it for she knew despite all that she was “first” in her husband’s affections. Another man’s wife had died and he wanted to marry two sisters but their mother wouldn’t allow it unless he married her too. This might be the perfect solution to the mother-in-law problem, for he married her first, and then the sisters. One sister didn’t have any children and she took care of the other sister’s children when needed, and it was a real happy family. Polygamy, if accepted by the wives made for unselfishness. With such a large family there had to be some system so each child had certain work to do. Today if sisters marry different husbands and live nearby they will help each other in child-birth, nurse the other’s baby if one has more milk than another, so in the days of polygamy, if sisters were married to one man they helped each other in the same way. If it happened that one was better at some function such as sewing, washing clothes, buying at the store, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, then naturally that function devolved upon that certain wife. One could take care of the children while the rest went to Sacrament Meeting and there wouldn’t be the babble of children at the meeting, while in monogamy someone had to miss the sermons while the other partner took the squalling child outside. And if a woman was ill, some of the other wives could do her work and take care of her children and she need not worry. While Brigham Young had his favorite wife Amelia Folsom, and other men might have had any especial wife with whom he was deeply in love, with many it would seem that the women didn’t get much fun out of it, as the men procreated as a “duty” rather than with amorous intent.</p>
				<p>Jonreed Lauritzen’s family pioneered the town of Short Creek, Arizona, in the “strip” north of the Grand Canyon, and he lived there for many years in this settlement of polygamists, although he, himself was not one of them. In his most recent novel, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Everlasting Fire</i>, deals of life in Nauvoo.</p>
				<p>The description of the cooperation between the wives who all love the same husband given by the Indian wife Coziah is the best that I have read on this subject. Where life does not get dull for there was a chance of a new sister-wife coming along almost any day. The publisher would not permit any quotations from the book. Those interested can read for themselves: Doubleday <abbr>Co.</abbr>, New York City, 1962. Price $5.95.</p>
				<p>Kimball Young says that President John Taylor and Apostle Erastus Snow each had a segregated establishment for a wife, and the families had relatively little to do with each other except at reunions and special events. This limited both conflict and cooperation. Then there were some families that couldn’t take it. Another man had a freighting business and no one knew when he was coming or going. Once he came at night and his oldest girl wouldn’t allow him in her mother’s bedroom, saying there were too many children already.</p>
				<p>The following is from <i epub:type="se:name:publication">The Journal of Discourses</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 4, pages 55–57, by Brigham Young: To the women who were whining, “I am going to give you from this time (<abbr>Sept.</abbr> 21, 1856) to the 6th of October next, for reflection, that you may determine whether you wish to stay with your husbands or not, and then I am going to set every woman at liberty and say to them, now go your way, my women with the rest, go your way. And my wives have got to do one of two things: either round up their shoulders to endure the afflictions of this world, and live their religion, or they may leave, for I will not have them about me. I will go into heaven alone, rather than have scratching and fighting around me. I will set all at liberty. ‘What, first wife too?’ Yes, I will liberate you all.” None of them left.</p>
				<p>Werner reports that someone asked, “How many wives have you <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Young? ‘Having wives is a secondary consideration; it is within the pale of duty, and consequently, it is all right. But to preach the Gospel, save the children of men, build up the kingdom of God, produce righteousness in the midst of the people; govern and control ourselves and our families and all we have influence over; make us of one heart and one mind; to clear the world from wickedness—this fighting and slaying, this mischievious spirit now (1871) so general, and subdue it and drive it from the face of the earth, and to usher in and establish the reign of universal peace, is our business, no matter how many wives a man has got, that makes no difference here or there.’”<a href="#note53" id="note-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a></p>
				<p>After the manifesto there were plural marriages, even in the Temple by Elder Lorine Woolley, but nothing could be proven. And during the preceding ten years when over a thousand men had gone to prison there was still many who felt that <em>really</em> no matter what was said in public that the Lord would not allow this law to be changed. One man had been in jail three times and said that he would live openly with his wives. He did so and was not bothered again. The two best books on this subject are <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Family Kingdom</i>, and <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">I Have Six Wives</i>, both by Samuel Woolley Taylor, grandson of President Taylor who died in exile. The first book is about his father John <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Taylor, an Apostle who married three more wives after the Manifesto and was finally excommunicated for it. He is quoted by his son as saying that the persecutions came “because we insist on competing for wealth and political advantage with the Gentiles. If we kept to ourselves and minded our own aflairs strictly, nobody would care how many wives we had.”<a href="#note54" id="note-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a> It is said that President Taylor had a revelation that the plural marriages should continue secretly and that he told Lorin Woolley definite instructions on this matter. This was given to President Taylor when he was in hiding at the Woolley home in Centerville on Sunday evening, September 26, 1886. Members of the Council had been pressing Taylor to issue a Manifesto rescinding polygamy. He told them to come back the next day and he would ask the Lord about it that night. He did so and the next day showed them the revelation given to him saying that the principle was everlasting and was not to be rescinded, but the Committee would not allow it to be promulgated for it would mean jail for all of them. So Taylor chose five of them and gave them orders to continue the priesthood secretly until the time would come when polygamy could be open again. Later when Taylor was dead and his son John had been excommunicated for taking on his four wives since Woodruff’s Manifesto rescinding polygamy and Joseph <abbr class="name">F.</abbr> Smith’s second Manifesto in 1904, one of these five asked John <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Taylor to be head of a new Church. He refused to do so saying, “The Church has disowned me but I will never disown my Church. I will never join with any bitter group working for its downfall. I will never repudiate the Principle, but I here and now repudiate all men who try to use it in an attack on the Church.”<a href="#note55" id="note-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a></p>
				<p>Taylor says of his father: “When he was in town it was a gala occasion with a holiday aspect. It always meant a gathering of the clan with Mother, Aunt Nellie, Aunt Roxie, and Aunt Rhoda beamingly preparing the feast, a couple of dozen brothers and sisters on deck together with several dozen kids from the neighborhood.<a href="#note56" id="note-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a> Perhaps because he was away so much he was a heroic and legendary figure, not only to all his children but to all his wives… the stars never left the eyes of his wives, and its glow was reflected in the eyes of the children. If John <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Taylor sacrificed career, position, and opportunities for his families, he had the satisfaction of having his love for them returned in full. He never tasted the bitterness of having paid a great price for a bad bargain. His families were the all important thing to him in this world and the next, and to his family he was the all important man.”<a href="#note57" id="note-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a> On August 25, 1917, shortly after his death, the Mormon Church issued a statement that he had been “excommunicated from the Church… the excommunication has never been revoked, rescinded, nor in any way modified… Joseph <abbr class="name">F.</abbr> Smith, Anthon <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Lund, Charles <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Penrose, Heber <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Grant,”<a href="#note58" id="note-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a> signed the statement. This story of a happy polygamous family is charming and ought to be read by all who want a fair picture of the subject. It is not many men who could have six wives and make each one feel that she was really the most special.</p>
				<p>An equally charming book, but more critical of polygamy, for the author does not believe in it, is <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">I Have Six Wives</i>. It is a case history, the author having read the diaries of these wives, of a man now living in Salt Lake City with six wives, and having done time for it twice, but now he seems not be bothered by the authorities. I met him five years ago when I first visited and spoke in Salt Lake City, and I have since met him and some of his wives and children. Naturally the correct names are not given in this book, as the purpose was to explain how one polygamist of the thousands living in Utah, Idaho, and Arizona function in these modern ways. He says, “What were the stresses and strains of this type of life in the modern age? Golda was physically the largest wife and the most aggressive. She obviously was queen of this establishment, as befitted the senior wife. This was as it had been. There was outspoken Amy, small and dark; Faith, slender and gentle; Becky, with auburn hair and the spirit to go with it, serene with classic beauty; the sisters Pepita and Sybil, Pepita thin and intense, Sybil fair, calm and placid… Why? What led them there?”<a href="#note59" id="note-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a></p>
				<p>When the author was visiting the family one night the husband asked if it was not about bedtime. They all went to bed without a word, 26 of them. The author had only one child and it was a battle to get her to bed, he said. The polygamous father smiled and said, “With a family like mine there has to be order.” None of this family had ever been on relief, even when he was in prison.<a href="#note60" id="note-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a></p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Taylor visited Short Creek, Arizona, in the strip north of the Grand Canyon several times. Over a million dollars has been poured into this desert community by polygamists from Salt Lake City and Los Angeles. The young men work in neighboring towns and turn their wages over to the leaders, but the older leaders seem to have a monopoly of young wives. This is called the United Effort rather than the United Order, for they are only “trying.” The first big raid was March 7, 1944, when polygamists were arrested in three states. In Salt Lake City, 15 men were sentenced up to five years on the charge of “unlawful cohabitation.” Their attorney presented a list of 886 caught-in-the-act sexual offenders on record in the city the previous year. All of them had been fined from $5 to $50 and released without publicity. The Mormon Church activated this persecution. The second raid was July 26, 1953 at Short Creek where Governor Pyle sought to build his political fences by sending 100 troops on a Sunday morning to arrest these terrible polygamists. (The whole thing backfired and he was defeated in the next election mainly because of this foolish self-righteous attack.) Byers, the hero of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">I Have Six Wives</i>, had left a day and a half ahead of the raid. As in previous Mormon history, the reason for the raid was not polygamy; this was the excuse. The real reason being that the ranchers were being school-taxed to support all these kids, and the Mormons could outvote the ranchers if they took the idea.</p>
				<p>When Governor Pyle’s troops arrived the children were lined up in their best clothes singing <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">God Bless America</i>. 385 in all were arrested, mostly children, and taken to Phoenix where Judge Lorna Lockwood promised that the children would not be taken from their mothers, but this was done anyway. I left Phoenix for New York City about that time and the last $5 I made I gave to the Catholic lawyer who was defending them in court. Two years later Taylor visited Short Creek and they had the schoolhouse over on the Utah side, and the families were living together again. I know of one woman of this group whose husband was a drunkard, who drove a truck to Mexico taking her children with her. Under the name of LeGrande King Taylor, writes about one of the worst frauds among Mormons, polygamous or regular. This man’s real name is Leroy Wilson and he wrote to me for years when I was in Phoenix trying to get me to persuade the Hopi to allow him to build some enormous earth covered area for the Hopis to hide in. He had got hold of a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> in Chicago and thought I might be added to his sucker list. He lived on a mountain west toward <abbr>St.</abbr> George, with all kinds of junk machinery and cars and trailers, the latter for his wives. He was a big bag of wind who made everyone else live on cracked wheat while he ate steaks on his trips over the country getting suckers to bite on his many inventions. <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Time</i> magazine told a few years later of someone murdering him, and the sheriff figuring that a good deed had been done. Taylor says of him: “But to ask a question of LeGrande King was like fighting a pile of feathers, as I can certify. Brother LeGrande didn’t evade—he simply engulfed you in a torrent of words.”<a href="#note61" id="note-61" epub:type="noteref">61</a></p>
				<p>Jonreed Laurtizen, the writer, had left when one of his teen age daughters stood a good chance of getting engaged to a polygamous boy. This is likely the first time in America where hostages have been taken legally. Taylor asked these polygamous men why they didn’t go to Los Angeles where they wouldn’t be bothered by the law. They answered, “But that wouldn’t advance the cause. We will never win the fight with secret practice. Somebody has to keep the issue alive.” Frank <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Moss was the Federal <abbr class="initialism">D.A.</abbr> in 1956 (he is now <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Senator) and his position was not to have big raids but only to take them to court upon complaint. He says, “The problem that confronts us is that these men have established families and have a great many minor children. They are supporting their children to the full extent of their ability. In that respect they are acting in accordance with the standards we apply to good citizenship. They don’t seem to bother their neighbors. They are not offensive and are not committing other crimes or carousing. They are quiet and sober citizens. We shouldn’t disturb them.”<a href="#note62" id="note-62" epub:type="noteref">62</a> This would seem to be a sane attitude, and much better than those puritans who bought a home for wives who wanted to escape polygamy in Brigham’s time, and all whom they got to live there was one non-Mormon prostitute. Uranium has been found at Short Creek. If they become prosperous that will be a greater test than persecution. The Short Creek case came to the Supreme Court and was decided against them, and queer as it may seem, the liberal Justice Douglas was against them while the Catholic Frank Murphy, and Justices Jackson and Black were for the Mormons. It is conceivable that if a case came up again the Supreme Court could declare polygamy legal. Then the Mormon Church, if it had nerve enough, could allow it to come up from the underground. It is difficult to get any statement on a controversial issue from the heads of the Mormon Church. John Stewart of Logan, Utah, in his small book, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Brigham Young and His Wives</i>, 1961, a Mormon writer, says, “Seven of our nine Church Presidents have lived plural marriage,<a href="#note63" id="note-63" epub:type="noteref">63</a> and that this principle still is and always will be a doctrine of the Church.” Taylor says that “No Mormon can denounce discarded practices without renouncing his heritage. Where can the line be drawn between the belief in and the practice of?”<a href="#note64" id="note-64" epub:type="noteref">64</a></p>
				<p>“…the restoration of the Church and Gospel of Jesus Christ, is to prepare for the second coming of the Savior, which is nigh at hand; to help usher in His great millenial reign, when the Gospel in its fulness, including plural marriage, will be lived by worthy members of the Church,”<a href="#note65" id="note-65" epub:type="noteref">65</a> said <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Stewart. And he further states, “…plural marriage is the patriarchal order of marriage lived by God and others who reign in the Celestial Kingdom. As well might the Church relinquish its claim to the Priesthood as the doctrine of plural marriage.”<a href="#note66" id="note-66" epub:type="noteref">66</a></p>
				<p>I have attended church meetings of the Church of the First Born of the Fulness of Times with a mailing address in El Paso, Texas, and a colony 200 miles south in Mexico. About a thousand polygamous live there, while Short Creek has about 300. The congregation are mostly young folks in the lower economic bracket, earnest and likeable. They talk about the consecration of worldly goods to the Church but feel that it can’t be asked of people much these days who seldom own anything clear, but have it in hock. I will continue to visit their meetings. Old timers with whom I have talked say that there are 18 groups of polygamous living, mostly in Utah. Nothing is done about it unless there is a complaint, and as with moonshiners in Kentucky, no one likes to be a “stoolie,” and it is difficult to get a conviction.</p>
				<p>My friend John Marshall Day has completed a thesis on the Fundamentalists, and especially the Short Creek group whom he visited for two days, but by that time they refused to give him any more information. He states that the older men in the village who come from the most prominent polygamist heritage have the most wives and seem to have the pick of the young girls. For some strange reason more girls than boys are born there. When young men went to war and came back on furlough they were encouraged to marry; the reason being it is thought that the group wanted the allotment checks. This economic basis is also shown in that in the Depression in 1935 and Short Creek wives listed the same husband to get their relief checks. This awakened the authorities to the polygamous situation, and as more got on relief and as more children came of school age the Arizona ranchers were worried about the expense and put the heat on Governor Pyle to do something. There is a story of an Arizona official who came by chauffeur driven limousine the 400 dusty desert miles, and in a few minutes he said, “If I had to live here, I’d want more than one wife myself,” and he hurried back to civilization without another word.</p>
				<p>The leaders assigned by President John Taylor to work in secret and keep the polygamous faith were in order, John <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Woolley, Lorin <abbr class="name">C.</abbr> Woolley, Leslie Broadbent, John <abbr class="name">Y.</abbr> Barlow, Joseph Musser. The current Apostle is Roy Johnson. The polygamists criticize the Mormon Church for sending missionaries in style instead of “without purse or script” as in the old days, and they say that no revelation has been given the heads of the church since they apostisized on polygamy. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Day thinks that the fact that Short Creek is not sustaining and that the young men and girls go out in the world and work to bring money back to the colony will evenutally bring outside ideas there and the young folks will not so readily do as they are told.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Day points out that the Mormons, like the early Christians, started as a sect and developed into a church and gave up enough of their ideas to accommodate themselves to the outside world. They all started out dreaming of a utopia; the dimensions of which were determined what they lacked here. The religions founded in a desert country dreamed of a heaven or utopia like unto a Garden of Eden. The Eskimos thought of heaven as a nice warm place and their hell was a cold sky.</p>
				<p>The fact that these fundamentalists accepted state aid is as much of a defeat of their ideal, as that of the Mormon Church in doing away with pglygamy. If they despised the Gentile government why did they try to live off it?</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4>Negroes</h4>
				<p>Generally speaking the Mormon Church has denied Negroes membership of first class in their Church. There is not as much pressure for them to change as there was in the case of polygamy. As stated before the appearance of George Romney on the political scene may encourage the Church to ease up on the record of the Church on this subject. Joseph Smith has been quoted for and against slavery and while the latest he said on the subject was when he was running for President in 1844 to the effect that slaves should be bought from their masters, by money received from the sale of public lands, and freed. It is possible that this might have been a political plank, rather than a sincere expression of his thought.</p>
				<p>However, it is a matter of church history that Elijah Able, a negro, was ordained an Elder March 3, 1836, and a Seventy, April 4, 1841. In 1883, as a member of the Third Quorum of Seventy, he left Salt Lake City on a mission to Canada. It was said that because he had labored in the construction of the Temple he was elevated to the Seventies.<a href="#note67" id="note-67" epub:type="noteref">67</a></p>
				<p>William <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Barrett, Vice President of Brigham Young University says in <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Church and the Negro People</i>: “It appears that one person of Negro blood had been ordained an Elder by William Smith while he was on his mission in New York State as evidenced by a letter appearing in <i epub:type="se:name:publication">Journal History</i>, June 2, 1847, ‘At this place (Batavia, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr>) I found a colored brother by the name of Lewis, I am informed, has a son who is married to a white girl and both are members of the Church.’”<a href="#note68" id="note-68" epub:type="noteref">68</a></p>
				<p>Joseph <abbr class="name">F.</abbr> Smith in a funeral service for a colored Mormon by the name of “Aunt Jane” said, “She would in the resurrection attain the longings of her soul and become a white and beautiful person.”<a href="#note69" id="note-69" epub:type="noteref">69</a> And in a letter from the First Presidency, July 17, 1947, to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lowry Nelson: “We are not unmindful of the fact that there is a growing tendency, particularly among some educators, as it manifests itself in this area, toward the breaking down of race barriers in the matter of intermarriage between whites and blacks, but it does not have the sanction of the Church and is contrary to Church doctrine.”<a href="#note70" id="note-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a> What egotism for Joseph <abbr class="name">F.</abbr> Smith? How does he know that a fine looking colored person must of necessity prefer to be white?</p>
				<p>In the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">History of the Church</i> (<abbr>Vol.</abbr> 3, page 29) the question is asked of Joseph Smith, “Are the Mormons abolitionists?” The answer is “No, unless delivering the people from priestcraft, and the priests from the power of Satan, should be considered abolition. But we do not believe in setting the Negroes free.” Also, while an abolitionist spoke in the early 1830s in Kirtland, Ohio, Joseph in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication">Messenger and Advocate</i>, and as quoted in his <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">History ofthe Church</i> (<abbr>Vol.</abbr> 2, pages 436–438) said that the attendance was very few, “the gentleman to hold forth his arguments to nearly naked walls… I do not believe that the people of the North have any more right to say that the South shall not hold slaves, than the South have to say the North shall… but I can say, the curse is not yet taken off from the sons of Canaan, neither will be until it is affected by as great a power as cause it to come; and the people who interfere the least with the purposes of God in this matter, will come under the least condemnation before Him.”</p>
				<p>Brigham Young said, in <i epub:type="se:name:publication">Journal of Discourses</i> (<abbr>Vol.</abbr> 7, p. 290), “The Lord put a mark upon him, which is the flat nose and black skin. Trace mankind down to after the flood, and then another curse is pronounced upon the same race—that they should be ‘the servant of servants;’ and they will be, until the curse is removed, and the abolitionists cannot help it, nor in the least alter that decree.” And again in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 10, page 110, he says, “Shall I tell you the law of God in regard to the African race? If the white man who belongs to the chosen seed mixes his blood with the seed of Cain, the penalty, under the law of God, is death on the spot. This will always be so.”</p>
				<p>Joseph Fielding Smith, next in line to the Presidency of the Mormon Church, and who is Church Historian, was asked about Negroes being allowed in the early Mormon Church as Elders. The reply dated June 10, 1960 said, “Negroes were not ordained in the early Church.” This is in contrast to the statement of David <abbr class="name">O.</abbr> McKay, who is more liberal, and who is now President of the Mormon Church, who said in a letter of <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 3, 1947, “I know of no scriptural basis for denying the priesthood to Negroes other than one verse in the Book of Abraham (1:26)… The real reason dates back to our pre-existent life.” Note that he says nothing about the Old Testament, Cain and Ham, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				<p>Orson Pratt gives the theory (<i epub:type="se:name:publication">Journal of Discourses</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 1, page 63): “Among the Saints is the most likely place for the spirits to take their tabernacles, through a just and righteous parentage. They are to be sent to that people that are the most righteous of any other people on earth;… This is the reason why the Lord is sending them here, brethren and sisters;… The Lord has not kept them in store for five or six thousand years past, and kept them waiting for their bodies all this time to send them among the Hottentots, the African negroes, the idolatrous Hindoos, or any other of the fallen nations that dwell upon the face of the earth.”</p>
				<p>Joseph Fielding Smith further explains the idea (<i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Doctrines of Salvation</i> <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 1, <abbr>p.</abbr> 61): “There is a reason why one man is born black and with other disadvantages, while another is born white with great advantages. The reason is that we once had an estate before we came here, and were obedient, more or less, to the laws that were given us there.”</p>
				<p>James Boyd Christensen in his Masters Thesis, University of Utah, says, “In 1850 Utah was the only western territory that had Negro slaves. It was one of the few places in the United States where Negro and Indian slavery occurred in the same locale in the same period. It is interesting to draw a parallel between the attitudes of the Mormon colonizers toward Negro slavery and the Indian slave trade. In short, they countenanced slavery of Negroes among them while they abhorred the slave traffic among the Indians and legislated against it.”<a href="#note71" id="note-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a></p>
				<p>“The <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> census for 1860 gives the number of colored persons in the Territory of Utah as 59: 30 free colored and 29 slaves.” And this from the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Salt Lake Tribune</i> of May 31, 1939: “Patrick Sullivan, employee of a Salt Lake Abstract firm, while searching the record for real estate information, came across the copy of a bill of sale for a Negro boy named ‘Dan’ in a book containing transactions for the year 1859. The slave was sold by Thomas <abbr class="name">S.</abbr> Wllllams of ‘Great Salt Lake City’ to William <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Hooper, same address, for $800.”</p>
				<p>Just as polygamy and the Adam-God theory were contrary to the Book of Mormon so is this degradation of the Negro, for in 2 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Nephi</i> 26:33 we read, “he inviteth them all to come unto Him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come to him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God, both Jew and Gentile.” Of course churches that accept capital punishment and war all in the name of God deny Christ and His New Testament, for Philip baptized an Ethiopian, and Jeremiah asks, “Can an Ethiopian change his skin?” Peter is told that God is no respector of persons for “God hath shewed me that I should not call any man common or unclean… But in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him.”</p>
				<p>In the 1963 session of the Utah legislature several hundred members of the <abbr class="initialism">NAACP</abbr> and others demonstrated for civil rights legislation, and as a result one of the several bills were brought out of committee and passed and signed by the Governor, repealing laws which did not allow mixed marriages of different races. But Utah still remains the only state outside of the deep south that does not have laws of fair employment, fair housing, and of access to public accommodations for those of all races. This is no doubt because of the prejudice in Mormon theology against the Negro. However, the speakers at the Civil Rights meeting at the Unitarian Church were nearly all liberal Mormons from the University who were not afraid to thus go counter to the teaching of their Church and Lowell Bennion spoke against capital punishment at the Senate Hearing. He is a prominent Mormon educator. Catholics do not seem to be interested in this subject in Utah, although some priests belong to the <abbr class="initialism">NAACP</abbr>. The Catholic idea of refusing to mix with other denominations, even for a good cause, seems to have prevented them from attending Civil Rights meetings with the Unitarians. In May 1963, upon motion of non-Mormon Mayor “Brack” Lee, the City Commissioners passed a resolution unanimously favoring the serving of Negroes in all restaurants and public places. This was taken because a Negro reported that he had been refused service in a restaurant, but this is a recommendation, not a law.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<h4>Mormons Weigh Stand on Negro—May End Ban on Complete Membership in Church</h4>
					<p>by Wallace Turner. Special to the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">New York Times</i>. Salt Lake City, June 3 (1963).</p>
					<p>The top leadership of the Mormon Church is seriously considering the abandonment of its historic policy of discrimination against Negroes. Because the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has a lay priesthood to which almost every adult male member belongs, the effect has been to limit Negroes to second-class membership. “We are in the midst of a survey looking toward the possibility of admitting Negroes,” said Hugh <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> Brown, one of the two counselors serving President David <abbr class="name">O.</abbr> McKay in the First Presidency of the Mormon Church. “Believing as we do in divine revelation through the President of the church, we all await his decision,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brown said.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brown, a 79-year—old former attorney, said he believed that if the change were made, it would be a doctrinal revision for Mormonism of a magnitude matching the abandonment of polygamy in 1890. The whole problem of the Negro is being considered by the leaders of the church in the light of racial relationships everywhere,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brown said. “We don’t want to go too fast in this matter. We want to be fair.” Under Mormon doctrine, the President is the chairman of the prophets. He is always the senior member of the Council of Twelve Apostles, each of whom is considered to be a prophet, a seer and a revelator. A major doctrinal change would be discussed with high church councils before its enunciation by President McKay.</p>
					<p>There are now about 2,000,000 Mormons, and only a few hundred of these are Negroes. Members of all races, except the Negro, are in the priesthood. The church also has forbidden Negroes the right of marriage in a Mormon temple. In addition, the marriage of Negroes to members of other races is forbidden by the church.</p>
					<p>Throughout Mormon writings is the hint that the ban might someday be removed. Brigham Young once asked himself how long Negroes were to endure the curse of Cain. He thought it would be “until all the other descendants of Adam have received the promises and enjoyed the blessings of priesthood and keys thereof.” More positive hope was held out by President Wilford Woodruff, who led the church when polygamy was abandoned. He said: “The day will come when all of that (Negro) race will be redeemed and possess all the blessings which we now have.” The Mormon church, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brown emphasized today, has never closed the door to Negroes, nor to the possibility of removing the limitation on their participation in church affairs.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>In a telephone conversation June 8th, Hugh <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> Brown told Jerald Tanner that he was misquoted in the part concerning the change of policy, however, he expressed his approval of the article by saying that it was “on the whole very fair.”</p>
				<p>Within a few hours after the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">New York Times</i> containing this article had been on the stands or public containers downtown, all copies were gone. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tanner reprinted the article in a one page leaflet.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4>The Word of Wisdom</h4>
				<p>The Word of Wisdom was given by Joseph Smith, February 27, 1833, and it forbids the use of tea, coffee, strong drinks, and tobacco. The Church authorities today have changed the records trying to prove that Joseph and Brigham were strict on this matter. Joseph himself admitted that he often became drunk, and in Nauvoo he installed a bar in the Nauvoo House only to have Emma tell him that either she would move across the street or the bar had to go. Emma stayed. Elder Clark preached against drinking and Joseph publicly reproved him saying that Noah got drunk and yet he was counted by God to be a righteous man. Joseph had a pious sober clerk by the name of Robert Thompson. To wake him up Joseph told him one day, “Robert, I want you to go out and get on a bus, go and get drunk and have a good Spree. If you don’t you will die.”<a href="#note72" id="note-72" epub:type="noteref">72</a> In less than two weeks he was still sober but by that time he was dead and buried. In Carthage jail soon before they were kllled, all, including Joseph drank wine that the guard brought. John <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Lee tells of many times when working on the Nauvoo Temple they got a barrel of wine and drank all they wanted. Brigham Young, on October 8, 1859, spoke against drinking “until you really need it.” When his Discourses were printed this sentence was left out. At first the Utah Hotel which is owned by the Church did not sell tobacco or liquor. Now it sells tobacco and all who bring their own liquor can get accommodation of the extras that go with it. And <abbr class="initialism">KSL</abbr>, which is owned by the Church, advertises tobacco, coffee, and beer.</p>
				<p>I have heard Mormon leaders at their Sacrament Meeting at the University declare that while they obeyed the Word of Wisdom that a person could do all this and be selfish and greedy and miss the real meaning of the Gospel. As stated elsewhere when I came to Utah I ceased drinking tea and coffee as a courtesy to the true Mormon way of life and Mary ceased smoking Cigarettes. There are jokes told of Mormons who put their beer cans in their neighbor’s garbage.</p>
				<p><b>Tithing</b> as practiced in the Mormon Church is something that Mormons pride themselves on, and Gentiles are generally envious of the ease with which they get money. As given by Joseph Smith, “The celestial law requires one-tenth part of all a man’s substance which he possesses at the time he comes into the Church, and one-tenth part of his annual increase ever after. If it requires all that a man can earn to support himself and family, he is not tithed at all.” (<i epub:type="se:name:publication">Millennial Star</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 9, page 12)</p>
				<p><b>The Mormon Welfare Plan</b> in its present state was inaugurated during the 1930 Depression. At 7th South and 7th West they have a huge elevator full of wheat, a milk processing plant where milk from a dozen stake farms is brought and made into evaporated milk, powdered milk, butter, cottage cheese, and cheese, and a cannery that any can use, paying only for the tin cans. Those Mormon families that would ordinarily be on county aid can come here and get canned food, milk, meat, clothing, or whatever they need. No money is exchanged. Those who are not able to come to the warehouse have it delivered daily or weekly in plain trucks. There is a weaving department, furniture repair, shoe repair, and a barber shop. Many men from our Joe Hill House go there and work a day or two and get what they need. The Mormons pay taxes to the county and state for the aid given to Gentiles but they tithe themselves to help their poorer brethren. On the first Sunday of each month all good Mormons fast for two meals and turn this money over to their Bishop to pay for rent, utilities, <abbr>etc.</abbr> for the poor. When this fast is broken they have their monthly testimony meeting where any member can get up and tell of the blessings of his or her religion. I have attended many of these fast meetings, even when on my 45 day fast, and the Bishop generally had some of the congregation drive me home. It was all down hill going home but I appreciated their thoughtfulness. As at Quaker meetings, Christian Science Wednesday evening meetings, and service club, and sales meetings there is a lot of mutual backslapping, and some very monotuous conversation, but at times a sincere and eloquent note does come through.</p>
				<p>Perhaps half a dozen wards will get together and have a stake farm to produce milk, or produce, or have a chicken ranch, cattle ranch, or, as near Mesa, Arizona, a cotton ranch. In Houston, Texas, they produce peanut butter. They have a 240,000 acre cattle ranch in Florida, and citrus juice is canned in Florida, Arizona, and California and sent in exchange for applesauce, <abbr>etc.</abbr> from Utah. Some years ago when there was a big flood in upper California the Mormon Relief was days ahead of the Red Cross or any other help. Many elderly folks work at the warehouse to pass the time away or because they want to help. All this is in the old Mormon pioneer tradition and is something that those who depend upon the Welfare State could also do if they were not spoiled by the handout system of public relief. Mormons who got help when they are handicapped are encouraged to work to pay back if they are able to do so later.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4>The United Order</h4>
				<p>Reference has been made in this chapter to the United Order. This was tried out in Kirtland, Far West, Nauvoo, Salt Lake City, Brigham City, Orderville, and other Utah towns. The idea was that upon joining the Mormon Church each one should consecrate all that he had and turn it over to the Bishop. He in turn would judge how much was needed to keep the family going and if the man did not have enough he was given back enough to keep him in necessities. All surplus wealth was meant to be given over for the Church to administrate to those in need. The panic of 1837 toppled over the Kirtland economy, and persecution in Far West and Nauvoo prevented this plan from working. Brigham Young saw “winter saints” coming to Utah with a stock of goods and after selling them go away, or he saw Gentiles getting a lot of business. He then started the <abbr class="initialism">ZCMI</abbr> (Zions Cooperative Mercantile Institution) which nearly bankrupted the Gentiles. Now a $17,000,000 business is done in their two stores in Salt Lake City. The idea was a good one for the Mormon economy, for scores of industries were started and people were helped. But eventually in Brigham City the cooperatives got into the hands of a clique, and in Orderville the big wages to be made in the nearby mines weaned away the members. The increasing secularization of life in this century has made nearly all other cooperative effort into being that in name only, or as in the case of the Amana Community, they went directly into the capitalistic way of life. The inertia of most people tends to allow the direction of community life to get into the hands of the few, and while the leaders may be unselfish, it is seldom that their children inherit ideals. In 1880, the 50th anniversary of the founding of their church, a jubilee was declared, and tithes owed were cancelled, and all debts were supposed to be forgiven. In 1980 such clemency would break up the banker clique that controls the church.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4>Mormons Evaluated</h4>
				<blockquote>
					<p>
						<span>Joseph Smith when he was young,</span>
						<span>Saw a golden censer swung…</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>A Moses or an Abraham</span>
						<span>Felt that nations in him swam…</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He spun-the world four thousand years</span>
						<span>Back to Jacob and his steers…</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And the new age caught them up,</span>
						<span>Stilled the psaltery, drained the cup…</span>
						<a href="#note73" id="note-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a>
					</p>
					<p>―Robert <abbr class="name">P.</abbr> Tristram Coffin</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p><abbr class="name">V.F.</abbr> Calverton, who wrote <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Where Angels Fear To Tread</i>, concerning many communities, gave this report on the Mormons: “The Book of Mormon was founded upon theories no more fantastic than those of the Bible; it was interspersed with the doctrine of the day, rife with paradoxes and contradictions, and shot full of irrational and incredible supposition and conceptions.”<a href="#note74" id="note-74" epub:type="noteref">74</a></p>
				<p>William Mulder and <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Russell Mortensen, in their <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Among the Mormons</i>, a sympathetic anthology of their beliefs, say in the introduction, “Joseph Smith’s unfolding theology seemed tuned to all the reform fiddles of the times. He filled the breathless years with experiments in theocracy and communitarianism and temperance and polygamy, with expectations of millennium and the Second Coming, with world evangelism and practical programs of emigration and colonization, with aspirations and nonconformities which the frontier, despite its vaunted individualism could not abide.”<a href="#note75" id="note-75" epub:type="noteref">75</a></p>
				<p>Kimball Young, grandson of Brigham Young, feels that a score of prominent families control the Mormon Church and that they have lost that purity and desire to be different according to their faith, and have succumbed to the secular way of life.</p>
				<p><abbr>Prof.</abbr> Richard <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Ely of the University of Wisconsin, wrote, “The organization of the Mormons is the most nearly perfect piece of social mechanism with which I have ever, in any way, come in contact, excepting the German Army alone.”<a href="#note76" id="note-76" epub:type="noteref">76</a></p>
				<p>The Mormon <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Leonard Arrington in his <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Great Basin Kingdom</i>, said, “Church policy broke with the past by actively soliciting financial assistance from outsiders. And the concessions made to those outside financial interests paved the way for absentee ownership and control. Eventually, the levithan of American finance capitalism finally ruled Utah as it had long ruled Montana and other western states and territories."<a href="#note77" id="note-77" epub:type="noteref">77</a> “The self sufficient kingdom may be said to have been brought to an end. A more acceptable adjustment between spiritual and seculiar interests was attained. And with this adjustment, the church no longer offered a geographic and institutional alternative to Babylon. Faith became increasingly separated from community policy, and religion from society. Individualism, speculation, and inequality—once thought to be characteristics of Babylon—were woven into the fabric of Mormon life.”<a href="#note78" id="note-78" epub:type="noteref">78</a></p>
				<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Robert Dwyer wrote as his doctrinal thesis at Catholic University of America <i epub:type="se:name:publication">A Gentile Comes to Utah</i>. He is now the Catholic Bishop in Nevada, and formerly lived in Salt Lake City. He says, “There seems to be less profanity, rowdyism, rampant and noisy wickedness among the young Mormons than among the youth of any other town or city where I have been."<a href="#note79" id="note-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a></p>
				<p>Roy <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> West, <abbr>Jr.</abbr>, a former Mormon missionary in Germany, but now out of the Church, writes a sympathetic book: <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Kingdom of the Saints</i>. He concludes, “Heber Grant was President from 1918 to 1945. He was a member of or chairman of so many boards of directors that skeptical members of the church often asked themselves how much time President Grant had for spiritual affairs. His administration gave rise to fears that the Church had become an organization destined to be administered by aged patriarchs of an ultra-conservative cast—men whose judgments were too likely to be affected by the least lively minds among their subordinates. David <abbr class="name">O.</abbr> McKay, President from 1951 to the present. His first actions showed him to be a more vigorous and strongminded administrator than most of his followers had anticipated. He curbed the authority of some of Grant’s most conservative leaders, whose business interests and political bias had much to do with determining church policy… the member who once had a voice in advising his superiors through the priesthood quorums finds his way barred by men in the lower ranks of authority who are too afraid of the men above them to risk carrying criticism up the ladder of leadership.”<a href="#note80" id="note-80" epub:type="noteref">80</a></p>
				<p><abbr class="name">M.R.</abbr> Werner wrote a critical life of Brigham Young. He says of Joseph Smith, “It is impossible to determine exactly whether the golden plates of the Book of Mormon were an imaginative delusion ofJoseph Smith’s, or whether they were a piece of conscious fakery instituted at first for fun and later developed for their financial possibilities. His later acts seem to favor the opinion that he had succeeded in deluding himself, however much he may have been interested at first in deceiving other people.”<a href="#note81" id="note-81" epub:type="noteref">81</a> It is my conviction that Joseph Smith wrote the Book of Mormon without the aid of God, and that the book itself shows evidence of beinga product of Smith’s environment.<a href="#note82" id="note-82" epub:type="noteref">82</a> The important question is not whether Joseph Smith was divinely inspired, but whether he thought he was divinely inspired.”<a href="#note83" id="note-83" epub:type="noteref">83</a> </p>
				<p><abbr>Prof.</abbr> Thomas <abbr class="name">F.</abbr> O’Dea, a Catholic teaching sociology at the University of Utah writes on <i epub:type="se:name:publication">The Mormons</i>, and concludes, “The conservative, literalist, fundamentalist group seems now to control the church, and these principles of church organization—lay leadership, seniority as the basis of promotion, selection on other bases than theological learning, and control of appointments by conservative elements—make the advancement of liberals into church leadership very unlikely in the next several years. Yet it is these very liberals, shut out from leadership, who in the church’s educational system are saving many of the youth from apostasy. President McKay, while a man generally respected by all groups within the church, is not unfriendly to the liberals.<a href="#note84" id="note-84" epub:type="noteref">84</a> Moreover, it would seem a grave mistake for a religious movement to concentrate its attention on this—worldly activities, since it is precisely this—worldliness and activism that modern man appears to find inadequate. For organized religion to offer competition in spheres of life in which non-religious organizations do better—spheres themselves inadequate to the facing of deeper human problems—is to be found wanting. The basic need of Mormonism may well become a search for more contemplative understanding of the problem of God and man. And it is precisely here that the intellectuals—the products of Mormonism’s great vale of education—may make important contributions. It is a tremendous presumption to attempt to judge the future of a movement like Mormonism, yet it is my suspicion that those who emphasize the obsolescence of Mormonism, those who see the end of them in a stereotyped lack of creativity and a routine running down, who believe that this Mormon world will end not with a bang but a whimper, are wrong. There is still too much vitality—the characteristic Mormon vitality—remaining for such a prognosis to be likely.”<a href="#note85" id="note-85" epub:type="noteref">85</a></p>
				<p>Now after reading these books and studying their conclusions, and after asking questions of my many Mormon friends, I will venture the following opinions. Bear in mind that the preceding pages of quotations from authors who evaluate are thoughts that I can in part agree with, or I would not have selected them.</p>
				<p>But first let me describe for non-Mormons what the Sacrament Meetings of the Mormons are like. In cities where there are few Mormons, the meetings begin at 7 or 8 o’clock <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> and last for about an hour. The Bishop announces who will take part and then calls upon, say, a young man to open the meeting with prayer. Then about half a dozen young men distribute the bread after some such prayer as, “Oh God, Eternal Father, bless this bread taken in remembrance of the body of thy son Jesus Christ that we may partake of it in remembrance of Him.” And likewise when the water is distributed in small cups. Then a song is sung before and after, and perhaps a young girl reads from a piece of paper or recites from memory a four-minute talk on some Biblical hero. Then maybe a young couple play a duet or sing a song. Then perhaps two returned missionaries tell of their experiences, after which there is a song and a prayer. If there is any business it is conducted first, such as voting by hands to “sustain” an appointee to some church function. No one ever votes not to “sustain” any person. Here in Salt Lake City at the University Ward where I attend there are at times musical selections, but as the membership is composed mostly of students there are no young folks taking part. At times there will be but one speaker as when a <abbr>Dr.</abbr> burned a cigarette and put nicotine on a mouse causing its instant death, in a talk against smoking. Or when the Chaplain at the state prison spoke of affairs there. He did not tell of the tear-gassing of inmates and afterward I chided him about it. Speakers have read from Tolstoy’s <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Kingdom of God Is Within You</i>, quoted from Thoreau and Gandhi, and one of them said that if Christ was speaking today across the tracks none of them would hear Him for they were respectable folks and wouldn’t go across the tracks, shame them! Also about a Mormon who kept the Word of Wisdom and paid his full tithe, but needed humanizing as he was unsociable and greedy. Then on the first Sunday of the month is a Fast Meeting where those present have missed two meals and turn the money over to the Bishop to pay rent, utilities, <abbr>etc.</abbr> for the poor. The Bishop said some members must live very frugally for the price of their meals were only eight cents each. These meetings, after the sacraments and songs, are testimony meetings where anyone can get up and speak, being similar to the Wednesday evening meetings of the Christian Scientists. At times these testimonies are tiresome and one gets the feeling of being at a Rotary Club or Fuller Brush salesmen pep meeting, but at other times very sincere thoughts are given. Each talk in all of the meetings is ended with the expression “I bear testimony in the name of Jesus Christ that the Gospel is true.” And most of the congregation concurs by saying “amen.” A scribe sits on the platform and takes an account of what goes on and the number of those present, both Mormons and Gentiles. Unless the usher who passes by me knows me I am offered communion and I whisper to him “I am Gentile.” In towns where the Mormons are few, or I am told in Mormon towns out in the state, there is a spontaneous welcome of a stranger, but here in Salt Lake City the Bishop may welcome you but most others pay little attention. Of course now that I have been attending for two years, many of the folks know me and speak to me. On a rainy day some of them have driven me downtown.</p>
				<p>On days when I attend the Greek Orthodox I seldom see a blonde there, but here at <abbr class="initialism">LDS</abbr> (the Mormons seldom call themselves “Mormons,” but use the abbreviation “<abbr class="initialism">LDS</abbr>”) most people are blondes, as the converts have come from the north of Europe. The Bishop announced one day that during the past year there had been 26 marriages in the ward, and 20 of them had been in the Temple “for time and eternity.” At another time he called for three volunteers on a Saturday to work on the Stake Farm. There is Sunday School in the morning and <abbr class="initialism">MIA</abbr> (Mutual Improvement Association) on Tuesday nights at the Mormon Institute. The latter is attended by hundreds and consists of talks given by noted Mormons. At all of these meetings, parents bring their small children, but if there is too much noise they are taken outside for a time. The whole atmosphere at the Sacrament Meetings is informal, announcements being made of births and deaths. A speaker generally prefaces his remarks by saying “Dear Brothers and Sisters.”</p>
				<p>In Catholic Churches you very seldom hear a good sermon. It is usually a call for money or a denunciation of Communism or birth control, or at the best a dreary lot of hellfire theology. At the Greek Orthodox Church the sermon is short and tends to be ethical instead of commercial. At the Japanese Buddhist Church the sermons are in Japanese, but are translated into English. They are primarily directed to the children, but adults can get the idea. Both the Buddhists and the Mormons are happy people, as contrasted to the dreary fear of hell or of the Communists that one generally hears in Catholic and Protestant churches. As I have said before the Unitarian Church tends to be a good, or a bad, book review, although you are sure to get a social message there, instead of theology. The attendance at the Mormon Church is interesting and not dull, and I always look forward to going there. I attend the Catholic Church to receive the Sacraments, and only occasionally in the poor churches across the tracks do I hear a sermon worth listening to.</p>
				<p>Around the time of Joseph Smith, an Indian chief asked a missionary why, if God had caused a Bible to be written, had He not written it so it could be understood; that he would wait a year and see if the new brand of Christian just arrived was as tricky and bloodthirsty as the previous one.</p>
				<p>It is possible that the boy Joseph, sensing the bankruptcy of all existing religions, had prayed to God and did receive a vision from on high. It is obvious that there is little that is heavenly in the Book of Mormon, filled as it is with tales of murder and deceit, and paraphrased from Biblical stories. Even if it were true as history it is not important enough for a guide in these tempestuous days. Something more is needed than the old “eye for an eye” philosophy. It is obvious that midst his digging for buried treasure and his playing around with peep-stones young Joseph found that he could put across as bonafide whatever he fancied. It is also obvious that his revelation on polygamy, however it resulted in building up Utah, came to cover up his affairs with young girls and with the wives of those sent away on a mission. Whether prankster spirits or imps or his own bubbling imagination was the cause of his continued revelations is something that can only be guessed at. Certainly power corrupted him and led to his death, for there was nothing holy or inspired in his strutting around in uniform and driving out of the Church and out of Nauvoo any who questioned his secret wives or his open delusions of grandeur.</p>
				<p>Out of equalitarian dreams of Robert Owen and Fourier and the ferment of new religious thought of the times he did evolve his Word of Wisdom, which even today is worthwhile and which is something where the Mormons excel other religions. Their attempt at the United Order is also praiseworthy and could be even approximated today if it were believed enough. Perhaps because they chickened out on polygamy, they unconsciously emphasize the Word of Wisdom to cancel their guilt.</p>
				<p>Brigham Young did not pretend to be holy. He was a great organizer and without him the Mormons would likely have been no more than a tiny sect split into warring factions. He gathered from afar, not Saints, but varied kinds of people, and welded them into communities of cooperative effort. His threat to burn Salt Lake City was a masterly strategy, keeping the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Army at bay. He dealt with kindness toward the Indians which was something new in those days. But, like Joseph, his assumption of dictatorial power brought on the crisis whereby the Mormons had to cease their open polygamy, and control of the economics was limited. The expulsion of those who dared not “sustain” his policies, or who opposed his monopoly of sugar and salt and other business ventures, and the handing over to Porter Rockwell or Bill Hickman and their Danites for punishment those who opposed him, is no more to be approved than the modern tyranny of a Hitler, a Stalin, or a Franco. If polygamy was directed by God then to chicken out on it under persecution was cowardly. The assertion of the Church that the Constitution was divinely inspired, in lieu of the studies of Beard, the historian, is silly, and its adherence to man made law rather than that of God, as nearly all other churches teach, is part of their worship of Mammon.</p>
				<p>“The Constitution had been drafted by men representing special economic interest. Four-fifths of them were public creditors, one-third were land speculators, and one-fifth represented interests in shipping, manufacturing, and merchandising. Most of them were lawyers. The old Articles of Confederation, to which the States had subscribed in good faith as a working agreement, made all the provision for their own amendment; and now these men had ignored these provisions, simply putting the Articles of Confederation in the waste-basket and bringing forth an entirely new document of their own devising. Jefferson had criticized it because it had no Bill of Rights and did not provide against indefinite tenure of office.” From pages 176, 177 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Jefferson</i>, by Albert Jay Nock, Harcourt, Brace <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1926.</p>
				<p>The Mormons often say that the Constitution was divinely inspired and opened by prayer. The truth is that Franklin, no especially religious or moral man himself, suggested this prayer daily, but the motion was not passed, Alexander Hamilton saying they were not in need of “foreign aid.” And the fact is that those who called the Convention lied about its purpose, for they intended to form an entirely new centralized government to keep the farmers and the poor from ever overriding the rich and powerful. The Articles of Confederation were only to be changed by unanimous vote, but they changed it to a two-thirds vote and had to use many tricks to get that accord. Rhode Island and North Carolina let the new Constitution become a law without ratifying it. Beard says it was as much by accident as intent that we did not have a parliamentry form of government like England. The proceedings were secret and it was only by the fact that Madison kept notes that 50 years later we really knew what went on.</p>
				<p>The mechanics of church government whereby conservative old men elect each other to rule is something which the Catholic Church has been doing for nearly two thousand years, resulting in their stagnation spiritually. The Mormons have had less time to become corrupt but they have done very well at it.</p>
				<p>Since the time of Brigham Young, Mormon leaders have tended to be business men, as Catholic Bishops and Cardinals are also chosen, without much pretension of being holy men, and with little vision beyond the collecting of tithes and the expansion of their political and industrial power.</p>
				<p>On the positive side there is a Mormon tradition of self-help, rather than looking to the government, which is as counter to the this welfare-state age as was the original Mormon teaching to orthodoxy. They pay taxes for the relief of the poor Gentiles, but do not moan about it, and feed their own people by their fasting and self denial. This is in contrast to most Catholics who cry because they pay taxes for public schools and have to support their own parochial schools, so now that a Catholic President is in power they ask for federal aid. If Catholics disciplined themselves as the Mormons do in not using liquor and tobacco, and not depend upon gambling for an income, they could support their own schools. This emphasis upon a clean life on the part of the Mormons is their greatest asset. There is also an occasional healing by the “laying on of hands,” perhaps practiced with the old sincerity of the Christian Scientists, or of the early days at Lourdes. There is also the emphasis upon inquiry and there is no index of the books which Mormons must not read. When I have attended Buddhist services twice a month I have often met young Mormons there.</p>
				<p>Individual polygamists whom I have met, and those called “fundamentalists” whose literature I have read or whose clandestine meetings I have attended, predict the destruction of “Anti-Christ” who is in control of the official Mormon Church, somewhat like the Jehovah’s Witnesses and some Protestants call the Catholic Church “the whore of Babylon” and predict the destruction of all but the select few—the 144,000 who have kept the faith. These folks accept the debasement of the Negro, support of war, obedience to the government, except in the case of polygamy. They seem as bad as regular Mormons in their denial of civil rights to minority races. But, as stated previously, I have met a few radical pacifistic and anarchistic polygamous who do not belong to any group. As <abbr>Prof.</abbr> O’Dea states, there is still much of the old time Mormon vitality and integrity, which calls for those who are not afraid to make their church something like it was supposed to be. Here they are predominant. All they have to do is to be rebels. I am interested in the polygamous because they are a minority group, not because I favor polygamy, but they have their rights to practice their religion, if they take the punishment, that comes with it.</p>
				<p>It has been said that if a person is a good Mormon he doesn’t have time to do much else. Their praying for the dead in the Temple is as sensible and authentic as the Masses for those in purgatory by which Catholics keep their priests busy. Their theory of a pre-existent life coincides with the Hindu, Rosicrucian, and Hopi Indian teachings, and would seem to be more reasonable and just as Biblical as the “hell and damnation” of the orthodox Christians. But their emphasis upon “blood atonement,” the degradation of the Negro, and their emphasis upon worldly success as a proof of the favor of God leaves the Mormons no better than other religions which worship the Golden Calf in the Name of Christ.</p>
				<p>Because of the pressure of Communism, and the inroads which the Jehovah’s Witnesses are making upon orthodox religions; and also the storefront churches which “Bible-bang” the old time religion, that the fashionable churches have replaced with their social worker attitude to life, there is room for those millions who have not heard of Mormonism to be converted to this strange theology. They could have 20 million members instead of two million and their influence would not be as great politically and economically, outside of Utah, as the Catholic Church, the Mohammedans, the Buddhists, or Hindu religions in those countries where they are dominant, or even the Baptists in the “deep south.”</p>
				<p>The future lies, not with any of the organized religions, all of which have gone to seed, but with that spirit abroad in the world which typifiies Gandhi, Martin Luther King, and Albert Schweitzer, men who escaped from the restrictive bands of their religions, and who present a positive message of hope, self-sacrifice, and joy, rather than the piling up of money and the building of new religious edifices. Who will be the Gandhi of America? This is the challenge!</p>
				<p>A speaker at one of the Sacrament Meetings of the Mormons which I attended told of the Christian who asked God to guide his foosteps, but the fellow, like most church members, never moved. He was content to mumble prayers.</p>
				<p>Let young Catholics listen to the theologian Father Hans Kung, who, at the Vatican Council, calls for the abolition of the Index, the freedom of worship for Protestants in Spain and Portugal, and the right of the individual priest to obey his conscience rather than the medieval closed mind of his superior, and who quotes the “Grand Inquisitor.” Let them listen to the criticism of the Jesuit Father George Dunne who has told off stuffed shirt superiors all of his life and has insisted in speaking “controversally.” Let them listen to Dorothy Day who visited Pope John <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span> asking him to allow a Catholic to be a conscientious objector, instead of, like most Popes, asking for peace, but always supporting war. And let them listen to Pope John who tried to “get out of the bag” into which the conservative Curia bureaucrats had placed him. Let them listen to Pope Paul <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> who it is hoped will continue Pope John’s ideas.</p>
				<p>Let young Mormons have the courage to refuse to sustain ancient bureaucrats among their leaders. (The Danites won’t get you now.) Let them believe what they like about “the Gospel of Joseph Smith being true,” but, as Tolstoy says, let not this belief keep them from pioneering spiritually as their forefathers did materially. Let them know that Negroes are also their brothers; let them know that there is something higher than “obeying the law of the land.” Let them be courageous in helping to remove their state of Utah from the ideology of the deep south on the subject of civil rights. Let them stay in their Church, for a new one would in time become just as corrupt; let them have the courage of Joseph Smith and Brigham Young in searching for truth and in living it against many odds. They have the heritage of good bodies from their Word of Wisdom; let them be a leaven instead of an indigestible lump in the body politic.</p>
			</section>
			<hr/>
			<section epub:type="footnote">
				<h4>Acknowledgments</h4>
				<ol>
					<li data-se-note-number="1" id="note1" epub:type="footnote">From page 87 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Autobiography of Andrew White</i>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1907. <a href="#note-1" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="2" id="note2" epub:type="footnote">From page 94 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Brigham Young</i>, by <abbr class="name">M.P.</abbr> Werner, Harcourt, Brace <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1925. <a href="#note-2" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="3" id="note3" epub:type="footnote">From page 12 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Kingdom of the Saints</i>, by Roy <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> West, Jr., Viking Press, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1957. <a href="#note-3" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="4" id="note4" epub:type="footnote">From page 153, Werner. <a href="#note-4" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="5" id="note5" epub:type="footnote">From page 353 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Joseph Smith</i>, by John <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Widtsoe, Deseret News Press, Salt Lake City 1951. <a href="#note-5" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="6" id="note6" epub:type="footnote">From page 63, Werner. <a href="#note-6" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="7" id="note7" epub:type="footnote">From page 100, Widtsoe. <a href="#note-7" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="8" id="note8" epub:type="footnote">From <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Isn’t One Wife Enough</i>, by Kimball Young, Henry Holt <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1954. Direct quotations not allowed. <a href="#note-8" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="9" id="note9" epub:type="footnote">From page 404 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">No Man Knows My History</i>, by Fawn <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> Brodie, Knopf, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1946. <a href="#note-9" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="10" id="note10" epub:type="footnote">From page 47, Werner. <a href="#note-10" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="11" id="note11" epub:type="footnote">From page 47, Werner. <a href="#note-11" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="12" id="note12" epub:type="footnote">From pages 155, 156, 157, 159, 165, 169, 171, Widtsoe. <a href="#note-12" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="13" id="note13" epub:type="footnote">From pages 155, 156, 157, 159, 165, 169, 171, Widtsoe. <a href="#note-13" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="14" id="note14" epub:type="footnote">From pages 155, 156, 157, 159, 165, 169, 171, Widtsoe. <a href="#note-14" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="15" id="note15" epub:type="footnote">From pages 155, 156, 157, 159, 165, 169, 171, Widtsoe. <a href="#note-15" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="16" id="note16" epub:type="footnote">From pages 155, 156, 157, 159, 165, 169, 171, Widtsoe. <a href="#note-16" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="17" id="note17" epub:type="footnote">From page 84 Werner. <a href="#note-17" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="18" id="note18" epub:type="footnote">From page 100 Brodie. <a href="#note-18" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="19" id="note19" epub:type="footnote">From page xx, West. <a href="#note-19" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="20" id="note20" epub:type="footnote">From pages 83, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> I, <i epub:type="se:name:publication">Journal ofDisoourses</i> and <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 2, pages 186, 311, 322. <a href="#note-20" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="21" id="note21" epub:type="footnote">From page 2 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Life Story of Brigham Young</i>, by Susa Young Gates and Leah <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Widstoe, Macmillan <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1930. <a href="#note-21" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="22" id="note22" epub:type="footnote">From page 8, Werner. <a href="#note-22" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="23" id="note23" epub:type="footnote">From page 73, Gates and Widtsoe. <a href="#note-23" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="24" id="note24" epub:type="footnote">From page 23, Werner. <a href="#note-24" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="25" id="note25" epub:type="footnote">From page 279, Werner. <a href="#note-25" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="26" id="note26" epub:type="footnote">From page 220, 227, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 15, <i epub:type="se:name:publication">Journal of Disoourses</i>. <a href="#note-26" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="27" id="note27" epub:type="footnote">From page 213, West. <a href="#note-27" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="28" id="note28" epub:type="footnote">From pages 261, 329,318, 338, Young and Gates. <a href="#note-28" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="29" id="note29" epub:type="footnote">From page 462, Werner. <a href="#note-29" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="30" id="note30" epub:type="footnote">From page 278, West. <a href="#note-30" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="31" id="note31" epub:type="footnote">From pages 307, 323, Gates and Widtsoe. <a href="#note-31" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="32" id="note32" epub:type="footnote">From page 390 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Desert Saints</i>, by Nels Anderson, <abbr class="initialism">U.</abbr> of Chicago 1942. Special permission of the author. <a href="#note-32" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="33" id="note33" epub:type="footnote">From page 265, Werner. <a href="#note-33" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="34" id="note34" epub:type="footnote">From pages 16, 19, 48, 72 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">One Who Was Valiant</i>, by Clarissa <abbr class="name">Y.</abbr> Spencer and Mabel Hamer. Published by the Caxton Printers, <abbr>Ltd.</abbr>, Caldwell, Idaho. Used by special permission of the copyright owners. <a href="#note-34" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="35" id="note35" epub:type="footnote">From page 578 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Story of the Mormons</i>, by <abbr class="name">Wm. A.</abbr> Linn, Macmillan <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1902. <a href="#note-35" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="36" id="note36" epub:type="footnote">From page 195, West. <a href="#note-36" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="37" id="note37" epub:type="footnote">From page 220, West. <a href="#note-37" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="38" id="note38" epub:type="footnote">From page 257, West. <a href="#note-38" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="39" id="note39" epub:type="footnote">From page 91 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Great Basin Kingdom</i>, by Leonard Arrington. This and following qoutations used by special permission of Harvard University Press. Book printed in 1958. <a href="#note-39" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="40" id="note40" epub:type="footnote">From page 190, Gates and Widtsoe. <a href="#note-40" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="41" id="note41" epub:type="footnote">From page 98, Temple Lot Case court record in Missouri. <a href="#note-41" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="42" id="note42" epub:type="footnote">From page 296 of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 5, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">History of the Church</i>, by Joseph Smith. <a href="#note-42" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="43" id="note43" epub:type="footnote">From pages 208, 209 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Mountain Meadows Massacre</i>, by Juanita Brooks. This and following quotation quoted by special permission of The <abbr class="initialism">U.</abbr> of Oklahoma Press, Norman, Oklahoma. Book printed in 1962. <a href="#note-43" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="44" id="note44" epub:type="footnote">From page 223, Brooks. <a href="#note-44" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="45" id="note45" epub:type="footnote">From pages 94, 146, 147, Anderson. <a href="#note-45" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="46" id="note46" epub:type="footnote">From <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Deseret News</i>, November 1, 1855. <a href="#note-46" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="47" id="note47" epub:type="footnote">From page 504, Arrimgton. <a href="#note-47" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="48" id="note48" epub:type="footnote">From page 114, <i epub:type="se:name:publication">Historical Record</i>. <a href="#note-48" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="49" id="note49" epub:type="footnote">From letter of Benjamin <abbr class="name">F.</abbr> Johnson to George <abbr class="name">S.</abbr> Gibbs, noted from page 153 of a mimeographed book entitled <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Mormonism</i>, by Jerald Tanner, 566 Center <abbr>St.</abbr>, Salt Lake City 16, Utah, 1963. Price $3.00. <a href="#note-49" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="50" id="note50" epub:type="footnote">From page 149, Werner. <a href="#note-50" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="51" id="note51" epub:type="footnote">From page 355, Werner. <a href="#note-51" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="52" id="note52" epub:type="footnote">From page 56, Werner. <a href="#note-52" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="53" id="note53" epub:type="footnote">From page ix, Werner. <a href="#note-53" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="54" id="note54" epub:type="footnote">From page 33 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Family Kingdom</i>, by Samuel Woolley Taylor, McGraw Hill, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1951. <a href="#note-54" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="55" id="note55" epub:type="footnote">From pages 274, 279, Taylor. <a href="#note-55" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="56" id="note56" epub:type="footnote">From page 251, Taylor. <a href="#note-56" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="57" id="note57" epub:type="footnote">From page 262, Taylor. <a href="#note-57" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="58" id="note58" epub:type="footnote">From page after page 262, Taylor. <a href="#note-58" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="59" id="note59" epub:type="footnote">From page 19 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">I Have Six Wives</i>, by Samuel Woolley Taylor, Greenberg, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1956. <a href="#note-59" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="60" id="note60" epub:type="footnote">From page 20, Taylor in above book. <a href="#note-60" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="61" id="note61" epub:type="footnote">From page 150, Taylor in above book. <a href="#note-61" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="62" id="note62" epub:type="footnote">From page 271, Taylor in above book. <a href="#note-62" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="63" id="note63" epub:type="footnote">From page 22 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Brigham Young and His Wives</i>. Quotations reprinted by special permission of the author, <abbr>Prof.</abbr> John Stewart, and Mercury Publishing <abbr>Co.</abbr>, Salt Lake City. Book printed in 1962. <a href="#note-63" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="64" id="note64" epub:type="footnote">From page 167, Taylor in above book. <a href="#note-64" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="65" id="note65" epub:type="footnote">From page 73, Stewart. <a href="#note-65" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="66" id="note66" epub:type="footnote">From page 47, Stewart. <a href="#note-66" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="67" id="note67" epub:type="footnote">From page 577 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book"><abbr class="initialism">L.D.S.</abbr> Biographical Encyclopedia</i>, edited by Andrew Jensen, Assistant Church Historian. <a href="#note-67" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="68" id="note68" epub:type="footnote">From page 7, 2nd section of <i epub:type="se:name:publication">Mormonism and the Negro</i>, <abbr class="name">Wm. E.</abbr> Barrett, Vice President of Brigham Young University. <a href="#note-68" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="69" id="note69" epub:type="footnote">From page 15, 2nd section, by Barrett. <a href="#note-69" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="70" id="note70" epub:type="footnote">From page 47, Stewart in 1st section above book. <a href="#note-70" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="71" id="note71" epub:type="footnote">From page 171, Tanner. <a href="#note-71" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="72" id="note72" epub:type="footnote">From page 166 of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 2, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Journal of Oliver <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> Huntington</i>, typed copy at the Utah Historical Society, quoted on page 188, Tanner. <a href="#note-72" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="73" id="note73" epub:type="footnote">Reprinted from a poem by Robert <abbr class="initialism">P.</abbr> Tristam Coffin, by special permission of Macmillan <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> City. <a href="#note-73" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="74" id="note74" epub:type="footnote">From page 133 by <abbr class="name">V.F.</abbr> Calverton from <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Where Angels Fear To Tread</i> Bobbs Merrill, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1941. <a href="#note-74" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="75" id="note75" epub:type="footnote">From page 9 by William Mulder and <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Russell Mortensen in <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Among the Mormons</i>, Knopf, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1958. <a href="#note-75" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="76" id="note76" epub:type="footnote">From page 185 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Mormons</i>, by <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Thomas <abbr class="name">F.</abbr> O’Dea, <abbr class="initialism">U.</abbr> of Chicago Press, 1957. <a href="#note-76" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="77" id="note77" epub:type="footnote">From page 386, Arrington. <a href="#note-77" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="78" id="note78" epub:type="footnote">From page 40 of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Gentile Comes to Utah</i>, by <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Robert Dwyer. Special permission for quotation by Catholic University of America Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr> The book was printed in 1941. <a href="#note-78" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="79" id="note79" epub:type="footnote">From page 409, Arrington. <a href="#note-79" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="80" id="note80" epub:type="footnote">From page 361, West. <a href="#note-80" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="81" id="note81" epub:type="footnote">From page 31, Werner. <a href="#note-81" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="82" id="note82" epub:type="footnote">From page 60, Werner. <a href="#note-82" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="83" id="note83" epub:type="footnote">From page 64, Werner. <a href="#note-83" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="84" id="note84" epub:type="footnote">From pages 230, 231, O’Dea. <a href="#note-84" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
					<li data-se-note-number="85" id="note85" epub:type="footnote">From page 262, O’Dea. <a href="#note-85" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></li>
				</ol>
			</section>
			<hr/>
			<p>The Church of Christ, Temple Lot, also called the Hendrickites, composed of 12 churches and 3,000 members in the vicinity of Independence, <abbr class="postal">Mo.</abbr> contrived to buy the two and three-fourths acres which Joseph Smith dedicated as the place for a temple in Zion. All Mormons would like to have this lot. The poor who own it won’t sell it to the prosperous Utah Mormons, yet they can’t build anything themselves on it. The Bickertonites have 45 churches and 2,000 members and have published the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Book of Mormon</i> in Italian. They edit a paper called <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Gospel News</i>. Bickerton was baptized by Sydney Rigdon in 1845. The followers ofJames <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Strang, who was once King of Beaver Island in Wisconsm, number about 250 with 6 churches. Their high priest lives in Artesia, <abbr class="postal">N.M.</abbr> There are also 100 followers in Burlington, <abbr class="postal">Wis.</abbr> of the original Strang group.</p>
			<hr/>
			<section epub:type="bibliography">
				<h4>Bibliography</h4>
				<ul>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Brigham Young</i>, by <abbr class="name">M.R.</abbr> Werner, Harcourt, Brace <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> City 1925.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Diaries of John <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Lee—1846–1876</i>, Edited and annotated by Robert <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Cleland and Juanita Brooks, Huntington Library, San Marino, <abbr class="postal">Calif.</abbr> 1955.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">John <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Lee, Pioneer Builder, Scapegoat</i>, by Juanita Broks, Arthur <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Clark <abbr>Co.</abbr>, Glendale, <abbr class="postal">Calif.</abbr> 1962.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Mountain Meadows Massacre</i>, by Juanita Brooks, <abbr class="initialism">U.</abbr> of Oklahoma Press, Norman Oklahoma 1962.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">No Man Knows My History</i>, by Fawn Brodie, Knopf, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> City 1946.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Mormons</i>, by <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Thomas <abbr class="name">F.</abbr> O’Dea, <abbr>U.</abbr> of Chicago Press, 1957.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Joseph Smith</i>, by John A. Widtsoe, Deseret News Press, Salt Lake City 1951.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Arizona Pioneer Mormon, David King Udall</i>, by Pearl Udall Nelson, Arizona Silhouettes, Tucson, Arizona 1959.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">One Who Was Valiant</i>, by Clarissa Young Spencer and Mabel Harmer, Caxton Printers, Caldwell, Idaho 1940.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Kingdom of the Saints</i>, by Roy <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> West, <abbr>Jr.</abbr>, Viking Press, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> City 1957.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Under the Prophet in Utah</i>, by Frank <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Cannon and Harvey O’Higgins, <abbr class="name">C.M.</abbr> Clark <abbr>Pub.</abbr> <abbr>Co.</abbr>, Boston, <abbr class="postal">Mass.</abbr> 1911.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Everlasting Fire</i>, by Jonreed Lauritzen, Doubleday <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1962.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Gentile Comes to Utah</i>, by <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Robert Dwyer, Catholic University of America, Washington, <abbr class="initialism">D.C.</abbr> 1941.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Joseph Smith</i>, by John Henry Evans, Deseret News Press, Salt Lake City 1946.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Great Basin Kingdom</i>, by Leonard Arrington, Harvard University Press 1958.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Isn’t One Wife Enough?</i> by Kimball Young, Henry Holt <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1954</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Family Kingdom</i>, by Samuel Woolley Taylor, McGraw Hill <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1951.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">I Have Six Wives</i>, by Samuel Woolley Taylor, Greenberg, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1956.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Where Angels Fear To Tread</i>, by <abbr class="name">V.F.</abbr> Calverton, Bobbs Merrill <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1941.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Among the Mormons</i>, by <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Mulder and <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Russell Mortensen, Knopf, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1958.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Deseret Saints</i>, by Nels Anderson, <abbr class="initialism">U.</abbr> of Chicago Press, 1942.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Story of the Mormons</i>, by <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Alexander Linn, Macmillan <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1902.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Joseph Smith and His Mormon Empire</i>, by Harry <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> Beardsley, Houghton Mifflin <abbr>Co.</abbr>, Boston 1931.</li>
					<li><i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Life Story of Brigham Young</i>, by Susa Young Gates and Leah <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Widtsoe, Macmillan, 1930.</li>
				</ul>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
