<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter14" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 14</h2>
				<h3>Catholic Worker</h3>
				<h3>New York City</h3>
				<h3>1953⁠–⁠1963</h3>
			</header>
			<p>We are a paper and a movement and a house of hospitality. As I said before, we are station where folks who have lost their way stop for a time until they can decide where they want to buy a ticket to—a monastery, the Ford Foundation, a union job, the Carmelites, marriage, or lower down on skid row. While there are perhaps only fifteen of us who will admit that we are anarchists, there are thousands who call themselves pacifists—that is, between wars, and likely there are a hundred thousand who praise us for our works of hospitality and our emphasis on voluntary poverty.</p>
			<p>As a House of Hospitality the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> is unique in that we who are “front office” live here and work for our keep. In organization we are truly anarchistic, for even in the smallest debating club or <abbr class="initialism">PTA</abbr> much time is spent in making up rules and by-laws and writing a constitution. There are just about two unwritten rules here: (1) don’t bring liquor in a bottle in the house. We don’t search the “ambassadors” but we pour out the liquor if we see them drinking. (2) We never call a cop, although twice when Dorothy did not know it someone called the police.</p>
			<p>The following describes our place at 39 Spring <abbr class="eoc">St.</abbr> Now we are at 175 Chrystie, feeding folks on the first floor.</p>
			<p>Dorothy designates someone to run the House and as long as they can do it without wearing themselves out they are the boss of how many people can be “paid out” for a flop when we do not have the room. Now we have eight apartments and pay for everyone else in a hotel or rooming house, but in the old days up to sixty slept in the house. The cook has charge generally of what he wants to order from De Falco, our old grocer friend from Mott <abbr>St.</abbr>, only we cancel lemon extract generally, for the tendency would be to use it for drinking instead of cooking. Roger O’Neill at Chrystie Street, who cooked when the cooks were drunk, used to have two kinds of meat and two kinds of omelette, rice, sweet and Irish potatoes, with no warning. As a vegetarian I would ask if there was any meat in the soup, and receiving a negative answer I ate it and found a bone, or as I would say “a feather” in the bottom of the bowl. In the old days we had a coffee line in the morning, and a soup line at noon, and supper for those living in the house. Now we are forty-two steps up on the third floor and it is not worthwhile for a man to come up for such a small bit, so we have a meal at 11:30 with sandwiches to carry out for later if they want them. The men come early and sit around, as first come first served, and we have to have a man at the bottom of the stairs to ward off the drunks who might fall backwards before they reach the top, and to tell the latecomers that there is saturation point in the feeding.</p>
			<p>In my early days at 223 Chrystie Street when just then most of the kitchen crew were drunk I got up at 5:00 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> and helped pour coffee for the line and scrubbed the slime from the hall and kitchen floor. Some men would come back as much as three times in the line. Often one drunk would preach to the line telling them that they were all no-good bums.</p>
			<p>What kind of people come to us? All sorts of tortured souls who have no other place to go. Peter said that we had to put up with one another the way God puts up with us, and Dorothy said we loved God as much as we loved the person we loved the least. By this measure I am a failure and so are most of us. The only thing is that we have different points of touchiness and tension, and a different breaking point as to how much of any certain kind of misery that we can take. And I suppose we get a “tolerance” toward certain irritations and an added intolerance toward others. One kind that is especially difficult for me to take is the scrupulous, over-pious person always wanting to put a scapular on me and hovering near the holy water. They are sure to burst out in vituperation a little later. We have had some of the quiet, withdrawn, scrupulous type who have generally been good workers in detailed filing, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> But once they are presented with an emergency their frustration and hatred of life has resulted in their violently attacking whoever is in their way. Then we have the loud-mouth braggart who when drunk by his very noise would upset everything. One such who has been here for twenty years exasperated me by his noise when I was trying to phone and I said to him, “How long do I have to put up with you?”</p>
			<p>“How long do I have to put up with you, you damn intellectual?” he replied. This is wonderful, for the Catholic Worker is a place for derelicts, and we intellectuals talk pacifism, anarchism, and go to Mass. All some of these folks want is one more drink and in between they have to listen to us.</p>
			<p>Then there are the hysterical women who quarrel, accusing each other of selling clothing we give them for drink, and who fight as to where they are to sit at the table, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>The first day I came to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> in 1953 Dorothy said, “Here is Susie; she wants to meet you,” and she left me for hours with a woman who chattered and chattered. She was a chronic pest whose noise would send the average man to a monastery or the asylum. I got used to her in years, but she is still hard to take. Later that afternoon there was a scuffle and noise in a room across the hall. Dorothy asked me to see what it was. There was Albert, a stocky part-Negro who had a huge cane as he was crippled. He did not allow “niggers” to come here and was trying to evict a huge Negro much bigger than himself. Foolishly I jumped between them saying quietly to the huge Negro, “You oughtn’t to pick on a cripple, don’t you think?” and to Albert, “You are not the boss around here. This man has as much right as you have here; now lay off.” They each one went to another corner of the room. I wouldn’t advise this as a tactic for I might have been clubbed by both of them.</p>
			<p>Bob Steed came up from Memphis, having asked permission of the Bishop there to sell the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, and later having this permission withdrawn when there was a strike and it was noticed how radical we were. One summer afternoon, right outside my office window, two drunken men, one Negro and one southern white, each had a knife and was daring the other in the foulest of language to knife him.</p>
			<p>“Oh, we must do something; we can’t see these men kill each other,” said Bob.</p>
			<p>“You are not God and you are not a cop; just hold yourself,” I said.</p>
			<p>“But we are our brother’s keeper; we are pacifists and we can’t let this violence continue,” said Bob.</p>
			<p>“You are young and you are going to see a lot of violence. You are in the midst of evil here on the Bowery, and you will see more of it.”</p>
			<p>“But it’s our duty, it’s our duty.” Bob said as he went towards the door.</p>
			<p>“Duty, my eye,” was my reply. After half an hour the two men got tired of shouting and each walked in a different direction. If we had interfered we would have provoked these two men to make good their boasts and threats and all four of us might have been knifed. We are going to have to put up with a lot of trouble or we shouldn’t be here.</p>
			<p>All those who come to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> for any length of time come through mixed motives. I had a crush on Dorothy but got over it in a few years. She is the best ever and has more integrity about what is worthwhile than any two radicals or Christians I have ever known. Everyone is enamored of her and calls her a saint. One woman wanted to know if she saw visions and she replied, “Hell no.” She is wonderful, but is not a saint, and what she says goes. This is no democracy and if it was I wouldn’t stay a month. For the weaklings would always outvote the few courageous ones. Everyone is not meant to be a Trappist and when Bob Steed was at the Trappists for two years it upset him so much that he left to get refuge here. He varied between scrupulous sanctity and anti-clericalism. Seeing Kerran Dugan and me reading the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Daily Worker</i> he was bothered and went to the local priest asking for written permission for the editors of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> to read the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Daily Worker</i>. The priest said that Dorothy and I could read anything, it wouldn’t hurt us, but Steed, he would have to see the Chancery Office about that. Of course nothing was ever done about it and in a few days Bob was off his scrupulous emphasis. Another time when I was fasting and picketing the tax man and was going to leave for my daughter Carmen’s wedding in California, Bob had just taken over the running of the office. In a rare spurt of efficiency he wrote out checks and paid all bills, but forgot to check up and see if all checks from the month before had been cashed yet. Now, being overdrawn, he said he thought it was God’s will that I should stay home and not attend the wedding. “Don’t blame God for your stupidity,” I told him. I like Bob and when he learns how to work and discipline himself he may develop.</p>
			<p>Stanley Vishnewski, my co-editor friend on the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, says: “Hurry up and die, Ammon, and I’ll make a fortune out of you selling <i epub:type="se:name">Special Hennacy Hamburger</i>: Ammon always liked them.”</p>
			<p>One rainy day I went downstairs to lunch and came back and found that some “ambassador” had lifted my coat and raincoat; the latter for comfort, the former to sell for liquor, I suppose. I was to go to court the next morning and did not have a coat. In the mail the next day came a coat which Tom Sullivan brought to me, and it just fit. Tom was here for about eight years after some time at the Chicago <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> with John Cogley. He was not a pacifist nor an anarchist but, I think, the best fellow we have had around here to run the house. He was kind to drunks and homos, and not so understanding with the half insane. Charlie Butterworth has taken special interest in the balmy folks and does the best he can with the drunks. I appreciate those who have done time no matter who they are, and the young folks seem to like to tell me their troubles and to listen to my tales of radical achievement. Most of the folks around here visit those who are sick in hospitals but as I don’t believe in medicines I am not especially interested in this activity. When Judith Gregory was here she was interested in farming communes and co-op housing. So through it all we have a variety of interests and everyone gets taken care of by someone. I meet with all kinds of radicals of the left, and with leftist union leaders, and the Association of Catholic Trade Unionists. I also am the Catholic who meets every other month with The Central Committee for Conscientious Objectors of Philadelphia, which is the group doing the most for those in trouble with the draft.</p>
			<p>Certain women come daily with handbags to haul out clothing which they sell, and often the woman who had been in charge of the clothing room got extra money for liquor or cigarettes by the sale of such clothing. We have an honest one now. At Chrystie Street we always had a night watchman who was always very very surly with any he did not know. One night John Cort from Boston, who was with us for years, came to say hello and told who he was, but this stupid watchman would not allow him inside. The old adage of Lord Acton that “power corrupts and absolute power tends to corrupt absolutely,” which I quote often in this book, holds true in the lower echelons also. Most of the men here who are sober for a day or two, if given power to allocate others to the table to eat, often abuse this power by telling someone that he is too drunk to be with us, when they themselves were that way yesterday and will likely be that way again tomorrow.</p>
			<p>A book called <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Subways Are for Sleeping</i> came out a few years ago which described some characters around the Bowery that would seem incredible. And a documentary <i epub:type="se:name:movie">On the Bowery</i> was filmed in which “Doc,” the second most important character, was formerly of our house. Some film was taken of us, but was not shown in the final picture. The main character was offered $40,000 a year in Hollywood but all he wanted was one day’s work now and then to earn enough money for a few days’ rent where he could lie with a supply of wine and drink himself into oblivion. He said to give the $40,000 to someone who would appreciate it. We have some such men here.</p>
			<p>Readers of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> in the thirties will remember the wonderful articles by John McKeon about the people he met around the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> and the Bowery. The one on <i>The Sky Apostle</i> who got tea and Chinese food after midnight in the cold nights and stood up those liable to freeze to death and fed them is one of his best. Raymond is still with us, a sober, good-natured, industrious, kind-hearted pack rat. On Chrystie Street we worked together pouring coffee in the morning. He would bring bags of chicken bones to be used for soup, and leave them in every corner until the place was full of rats. Old clothes, junky furniture, anything that wasn’t tacked down he would pile to high heaven, on the roof or in hallways.</p>
			<p>I have taken men to one of the cheap hotels to pay them in and later that night would see them drunk in the gutter. They had planned with the night clerk at the hotel to return the money so they could get drunk.</p>
			<p>When Charlie Butterworth was new at running the house a man came in with an ancient phony slip for an appointment to a hospital, wanting thirty-five cents carfare. He was obviously a fraud. Just now he was sober. Charlie was in a quandary for if he refused him money he was “denying Christ,” and if he gave him money he might be contributing to his forthcoming drunkenness. The man argued for twenty minutes and outfoxed Charlie who was a Harvard law graduate, so that Charlie asked me what to do. “For Christ’s sake give him the thirty-five cents; he has earned it,” I replied. The thing to have done was to chase the man out at once rather than to have argued with him. Young pacifists and Christians make this mistake of preaching and arguing with drunks or those who are not a bit interested in ideas. Your time is entirely wasted. I remember when I was new here and a very Irish man appealed to me as a fellow Irish radical for carfare to see his dying mother. (He might have done it on a wager to see how gullible I was, for this was such an obvious fraud that I ought to have known better). I gave him the $1.25 necessary and of course he and his buddies got a bottle.</p>
			<p>Before Charlie Butterworth had charge of the house two <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr> men came in and showed their credentials, asking for a certain fellow who helped in our kitchen who had been <abbr class="acronym">AWOL</abbr> from the Army for over a year. Charlie used delaying tactics and said that he was not the boss and that he would have to see Bob Steed who was in charge of the house. He knew Steed was not around, but he couldn’t tell a lie, or the truth, so he told the man in the kitchen that the “law” was after him. He then came back and said he couldn’t find Steed. Of course we helped the man get out of town. He was not a radical, just a fellow who had too much of the Army and got down and out on the Bowery.</p>
			<p>The <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr> came around and charged Charlie with “harboring” a deserter, which could have a penalty of five years; and for helping him to escape, another five years. Coming in from selling <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s on Wall Street one Tuesday the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr> men were here and when I entered they wanted to know who I was and what I thought about Charlie’s action. I told them I hoped the whole army deserted and they never found any of them. They asked Steed what he thought about it, and he said the same as I did. Then they teased him about not notifying the draft board of his moving from Memphis. As he was twenty-seven this was only academic interest. They asked Charlie if he had his draft card. He answered, “I am a weak brother; I haven’t torn mine up yet.” (Since then he has done so.) He is thirty—two.</p>
			<p>When Charlie came to court he acted as his own lawyer and gave a good presentation of his reasons for not turning anyone in to the police. For in the middle ages all lawbreakers could seek “sanctuary” in a church or monastery. The judge had given five years to a Communist, but said that his son was of the age of Charlie and took the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and he looked upon Charlie as his own son, and gave him six months, sentence susperided. When I went to get the $1,500 bail money back several of the clerks said they had read my book while at college. Now Charlie runs the house, continuing to be kind and courteous, but making decisions more quickly.</p>
			<p>Bob and I happened to be standing in the front window and saw a young man take off his overcoat and give it to a friend and come to us and ask for one. We told him he had better get it back from his friend. A drunk can be rolled and come to us barefoot without a shirt. No matter if he had $1,000 sailor’s pay the night before he really has nothing now. We outfit him and if he is not over his drunk he can mooch money until he gets drunk again and come again barefoot the next day. We don’t ask any questions as to names and reasons or keep any books about what we do. One fellow we called “Dear Soul” had charge of the clothing for a day or two and wouldn’t give someone clothing because “you are a drunk.” He was lucky he didn’t get beaten up in some alley for it is not those who have plenty of clothing who need it, it is those who are poorly clad. In a great number of cases people who get clothing from us or from any charity sell the clothes around the corner at a second hand store for very little. One of the common methods is to take a coat and ask for $5 and a “retainer.” This means that the merchant gives you $5 for your good coat that he may sell for $15 and gives you in return some old rag of a coat worth $3 that can keep you warm. Likewise with shoes, you get a dollar and an old, old pair for a fairly good pair. If you ask a man if he is going to sell clothing for booze of course he will tell you that <em>he</em> would never do such a thing. If you have spies to watch the man then you will have to have spies to watch the spies, and besides we don’t believe in any spy system.</p>
			<p>This “Dear Soul” was a twisted unfortunate orphan who had made the rounds of about all the Trappist and many other monasteries. He feigned an ungodly limey accent. Coming in he would greet you:</p>
			<p>“Good morning, dear soul! You are looking fine. And what is your problem?” By the time you had heard this said to a dozen people and twice to yourself each day it got to be monotonous. So after about two weeks of this I told him:</p>
			<p>“I am no damned dear soul; and I always feel fine, I never feel any other way; so cut out this pious phony crap.” He didn’t bother me anymore. He outshone nearly everyone in his energy. He always wanted to work and though he would just as likely put something in the wrong place and undo what others had done, at least he was moving. He liked to attend fires, hospitals, and funerals.</p>
			<p>At one <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> I was walking with a beautiful young woman who lived near us, coming home from the Village, when we saw a huge man sprawled across the sidewalk in a drunken stupor. It was in the early fall and not really cold, but she thought we should do something about it. I asked three drunks leaning against a pole to help me lift the man to a large doorway nearby, but they laughed, saying that all they were interested in was another drink. So I started over to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> to get Bob to help me. On the way I saw a drunken Negro blabbering at a fire alarm box thinking it was a police call: “Come and get Mable; she is a bad whore; she is an awful whore.” Bob and I came back with an overcoat (better than I ever wore) to place over the drunken man. Two fire engines, a dozen cops and a hundred people were gathered around, and a cop was questioning the drunken Negro who had somehow turned in a false alarm in his effort to get the police to corral his Mable. Bob and I partly lifted the drunken man while the girl lifted his feet and we dragged him to the doorway and placed the coat over him. We might have killed the man and could have robbed him and were now dragging the body and not a cop or anyone noticed us. In the morning going to Mass I stopped but the man and the overcoat had long since gone. Drunk people lay all over the Bowery and few people pay any attention to them. I deserve no merit for this good deed for I only did it because of the admonitions of a pretty woman.</p>
			<p>One night about 9:30 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> Dorothy and I were walking a few blocks from the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> when we heard a screaming and saw one gang of teen agers chasing another gang with steel pipe, clubs and what ever they could get. No police were in sight on this main thoroughfare. A block away from our place here on Spring Street a dozen Italians beat up a bewhiskered young man and broke the jaw of a long haired friend who was visiting us. These youth were not real “beats” but they were outsiders to these several blocks. Father Natallichio of old <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s spoke to us one night and told of two of the youth of the parish beating up an old drunk who was sitting in a doorway: and this happened with a priest not far away. The priest called the cops but the boys went away. Another time a man was murdered two blocks from the Church. And this is not a really tough section like parts of Harlem and Brooklyn.</p>
			<p>Several times when I have done time on Hart’s Island I have met a short fellow with a limey accent who is quite learned. I see him looking through garbage cans nearly every day some place. I think his specialty is rags. Others collect bottles, others food. People leave an awful lot of fairly good stuff in garbage cans, which if retrieved soon enough is usable.</p>
			<p>Anna is a sweet old Jewish woman who drags a couple of paperboard boxes with twine strings attached containing whatever junk she has picked up from garbage cans and doorways. She had been a seamstress in her youth. No one knows much definitely about her. She had long hairs straggling out from her chin and pretty blue eyes. She was forever asking for a smoke, thinking that she was too unworthy to have a tailor-made cigarette, but wanting a bag of Bugler to roll her own, and picking up butts. She would not sleep in a room or on a bed, but would lie on the floor in a doorway or hall. She did not seem to realize that cigarette butts thrown away when she emptied ashtrays into full wastepaper baskets caused fire and so she was an unconscious firebug. Her mind was hazy about people and places and if she did not see a person for a day or two she would ask if he or she had gone on a long trip or if they hat gotten married. Once we had a call that she had been hit by a truck and both legs broken. We went to see her in a hospital and she has not been to see us for several years, as the Jewish charities now take care of her.</p>
			<p>One highly placed mechanic liked our works of mercy and was our friend for twenty years but when we commenced to get arrested on the air raid drill he ceased to come around. Dozens of seminarians come and work for a few days, weeks, or months, and after they become priests they come back and say hello when they can.</p>
			<p>Another fellow had worked for the State Department in the Near East and was getting a divorce from his wife there, or rather she was getting the divorce from him. He came to us perhaps a little high on dope or perhaps this was his rather insane manner. He brought an assorted group of homos and drunks with him. He was always dressed as a gentleman and had an Oxford accent. I expect because I listened to him he thought I was a fine fellow. He would come in and “write his book.” When anyone crossed him in the slightest detail he would take a pencil and mark off a page in his book saying, “I have crossed your name out of my book.” One day he came in from the television room saying to me, “That was sure fine the way you told off Bishop Sheen.” His mind went this way:</p>
			<ol>
				<li>I like Hennacy.</li>
				<li>I don’t like Bishop Sheen.</li>
				<li>If Hennacy told off Sheen on television that would be wonderful.</li>
				<li>Therefore it happened.</li>
			</ol>
			<p>Paul was a quiet middle-aged man, perhaps a little queer, but never to be noticed one way nor the other. He lived with us and cheerfully ran certain errands. One day he was missing and word came from an insane asylum that he had ben picked up for some irrational activity and was being kept there. A bank book had been found on him with a credit of $2,000. All this time he was with us he had not slept in his bed but had been a night clerk at a flop house and had banked his money. The State took all his money for his keep and then paroled him back to us. He does not get drunk very often and is quiet and of little trouble, but has given up doing much work.</p>
			<p>Lena is a not-unattractive Italian woman who propositioned several old Italian men to go into business with her, and after she got their money she vanished. They came around here and wanted their money. She ate here off and on. She was forever running to Church and one day came with the news that a certain Puerto Rican glutton who ate as much as three at our table, was dead from an operation on his extensive stomach. She had the priest say Mass for him and we put up a notice in the office for prayers for Pedro. Soon afterward we saw Pedro at Mass. It seems that he had been sick and was taken into the ambulance with his eyes closed and she thought he was dead. We all teased her at the “resurrection of Pedro” because of her prayers.</p>
			<p>A very dapper young man worked in our office and wrote an excellent article for our paper. Whether it was dope or booze or both we do not know, but after a time he was gone. Two phonies that I remember: one was grooming himself to run for President of the United States, dressed well, and inveigled us into making long phone calls for some mythical mooch. Another had a scheme for world peace and was disappointed because we would not turn our mailing list over to him. He did get hold of lists and had suckers paying the postage and addressing envelopes to any list he could get with all kinds of crazy schemes. We kept him for a few weeks but did not let him get near the files.</p>
			<p>Selling <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s at <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s one Sunday morning, a social worker in the midwest whom I had not seen for twenty years introduced a young man to me whom we thought we could help. He came to us and slept on a cot among several others. Near morning we heard a hissing like a snake and then he had a terrible screaming fit running madly around. He did not froth at the mouth. He finally told us that he had escaped from an asylum and had not been taking his medicine. He banged himself around us for months until he finally went back to the hospital. We have had several others who were escapees but we did not know it, who were not violent, but depressed.</p>
			<p>We had news from a nun that a certain Negro girl had her face burned and needed skin grafting. We published an appeal for funds which were sent to the nun. After a time the nun wrote to send no more money for this family used the girl as a come on. They would not give her up to the doctors for an operation unless the nun bought them a house, a car, and gave them a certain sum of money. They had been subsidized these few months and now they moved on to some other town for their game of fleecing the gullible.</p>
			<p>A good looking young Negro couple with half a dozen children gave some story about being out of work and we fed them several times and gave them food to take home. Accidently we saw them get into a nice big car a few blocks away. One Sunday morning they came very late to eat and the man made up story about working overtime. His wife spoke up and said he was dancing with bad women all night and never went to bed at all. Scores of men and women who come here will get a job working in hotels in the mountains, or other short time jobs, but the trouble is that they ask for money ahead of time and get fired, or if they last a time they will come home and drink it up. They cannot handle money and at this age they will never learn. Many of them really think that this time they will keep sober. We have men who work in the kitchen who will get drunk perhaps only twice a year and who are fine workers. Others are hiding away from their families, or have prison parole. Many are too shaky to hold a job if they had one.</p>
			<p>One fellow who has been here for many years hates anything religious. He does a little work but not much. He does not smoke or drink and is very surly. He has grown up children somewhere. He asked us for $7 a month because we spend that much on others for tobacco and he does not smoke. We told him we would charge him $21 a month to live with us and knock off $7 and he owed us only $14 then. He may be a miser who has money saved in a bank.</p>
			<p>One night just before a Friday night meeting a young man who is not a Catholic but who knew us brought a red-faced half-drunk Irishman out of the gutter to me saying, “Hennacy, here is Christ. Take him and clean him up.” I told him to bring him in and he could clean him up; we don’t have to go out asking for customers. The man wanted another drink and in our warm room he felt uncomfortable. Another visitor would bring men in to us with wine sores on their legs and want us to clean them up. Days would be spent trying to get them into hospitals. As long as they drank they would have these wine sores and little could be done about it. Priests would see a drunk uptown and phone us saying they were sending a man down for us to keep overnight. It was generally the old story: the man took the carfare and went into the nearest saloon and never reached us. But one night around 11 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> the Traveler’s Aid phoned saying there were two Scottish Catholic girls at the Union station stranded and all welfare agencies were closed. What could I do? I had never heard of a Scottish Catholic girl, so I told them to visit until I did some phoning. I met them and carried their suitcases, one to Eileen Egan’s and one to Janet Burwash’s apartment.</p>
			<p>A certain middle aged woman of vituperative voice that would frighten a regiment has a stodgy son who is deaf and dumb, a victim of meningitis. She came to us with a story of being defrauded by landlords, neighbors, <abbr>etc.</abbr> and having no place to live. We publicized her plight and tried to get her a place. Finally someone sent us $50 a month rent for her. In our innocence we gave it to her for the rent. After five months she was thrown out for the non-payment of rent. She had never paid a cent of it. She would not ask for relief for if she did her son would be sent to an institution and she would lose her son as a “come-on.” We felt that she pinched her son and made him yell so she could get sympathy. She would have half a dozen coats for him and take him out coatless in the cold saying, “My poor boy needs a coat.” She would take him into saloons and in front of churches to get donations from folks who would pity her or who would give her money to get rid of her. Finally no one would put up with her and we took her in and gave her a large room downstairs next to the kitchen. The $50 a month still came for her and she gave out to everyone that we were getting rich from her money. When she saw anyone ask for a second helping or get an extra cup of coffee she would yell, “You can’t have it; my money pays for it.” To have her around was worth $500 a month wear and tear on all of us. She would steal anything she could get her hands on and sell it. I had a call from the Quakers and one from the <abbr>St.</abbr> Vincent de Paul chiding us for being too hard on this poor woman and robbing her of her money. I told them they could have her if they wished. When we put in the sprinkler system we had to tear up her room and this was an excuse to get her right off our hands. We found stores of sheets, clothing, <abbr>etc.</abbr> that she had hidden away and not sold yet. One day a woman lawyer from the west who had written that she had wanted to learn how we did things in our “social work” came with a friend to look us over. I had told her not to expect much, and that we could do very little; we had to put up with a lot of misery. She and her friend were Inspecting our kitchen. Two stairways led up from it to our office. She came up one stairway and her friend the other and they met on either side of this woman and her dumb son who was shouting and roaring. This was enough; they ran out quickly. We could not have staged it better if we had tried. Stories come to us now and then of people and agencies who have been taken in for months by this woman, but we are the ones who bear the brunt now. We pay this rent—$50 a month and feed them.</p>
			<p>I have three people in mind who were terrible pests, and although I have a lot of patience, I could hardly take them, but finally each of them have gone out in the world and achieved integrity and greet me now casually as an old-time friend.</p>
			<p>There is my friend Larry the cook who sweats daily and puts up with intellectuals who gabble at the table or come late and prolong his working hours. He has more patience than I.</p>
			<p>“Saviour of the World, save Russia,” is said at the end of each Mass at <abbr>St.</abbr> Michael’s Church. The Communists are supposed to be our ideological enemies. We feel that it is hypocrisy for us to pray for our enemies and at the same time want to drop bombs on them. Father Connell the theologian advocates a <em>limited</em> germ and atomic war against the Communists, and <abbr>Msgr.</abbr> Conway although expressing sympathy with the “sentimental pacifism” of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, also believes in a limited atomic war. Whatever that will turn out to be! So we really feel kindly toward the Communists here and in the world.</p>
			<p>When the 65,000 papers come to our office each month I go uptown around noon, first to the Communist Party and the Worker headquarters on West 26 Street, give them a dollar as a good will offering for their expenses (for they have families to keep and do not get any Moscow gold or any donations from Corliss Lamont, skip day days, and are poorer than we are). I know all of them and give them a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and talk for a few minutes about anything of interest. Then I go to the Catholic Charities where Janet Burwash and other friends work and give them some papers. Then to the American Friends Service Committe (Quakers) where my good friend Bob Gilmore holds forth, and present them with the latest news from the left. The remainder I take to the Jefferson Bookstore (Communist) on East 16 street near Klein’s Annex, where they are given out free and put in good display.</p>
			<p>“Where did you come from and where are you going?” asked my priest friend at the Catholic Charities, good-naturedly.</p>
			<p>“I’m coming from the Communists and I’m going to the Quakers.”</p>
			<p>“Which one do you like the best?”</p>
			<p>“Why, the Communists, of course; all you others are pie-cards living off the miseries of others at a good salary,” I replied.</p>
			<p>When I was on Nightbeat once I was asked, “What did you do today?” I told them of getting the mail after going to 7 o’clock Mass, answering the mail, selling papers on Wall Street, and then I got a red rose and took it to my old time radical friend, the Communist Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, as I was visiting her. By this time my interviewer got nervous and asked me other questions.</p>
			<p>In 1956 the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Revenue Department illegally padlocked the premises of the Communist Daily Worker for taxes for which they did not receive the bill until the next week. They did not owe these taxes but it was at the height of the McCarthy hysteria. I remember Dorothy sitting at her desk to the right in the front office at Chrystie Street and boiling over and writing the following which I took to the protest meeting at Carnegie Hall where it was read. And later we printed it editorially in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>We at the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> express our sympathy to the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Daily Worker</i> in the eviction they have suffered even though their beliefs are contrary to our own. Freedom of the press is a concept fundamental to Jeffersonians and libertarians and freedom in general is essentially a religious concept. The Smith Act itself shows that our country is so superficially religious that it is not willing to take the risk and consequences of a faith in freedom and man’s use of it. If we only had the space and could be truly charitable and hospitable we would offer the use of our offices and even of our mailing list, since the bureaucrats have confiscated yours, and we are sure that we would risk nothing in such a gesture but achieve a healthful clarification of thought. Yours for a green and peaceful revolution. The editors of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Later we withdrew the offer of the mailing list which was made under emotional stress and in a facetious manner. In February of 1957, Dorothy was invited as one of half a dozen non-Communist radicals and liberals to be “observers” at the Communist 16th Annual Convention where 350 delegates debated the issues of Poland and Hungary and what the Communist Party should do about it. Various McCarthyite papers called Dorothy an “Enemy of the Cross of Christ” for associating wth the Communist enemy. In an article in the March issue she quotes <abbr class="name">Wm. Z.</abbr> Foster as saying in his opening speech, Who Is The Enemy, certainly not those gathered together there at Chateau Gardens (a few doors from our Chrystie Street House of Hospitality), but the men of Wall Street. And furthermore, a greater enemy to the worker than the government has been the corrupting influence of our prosperity, our soft living, Foster said. “Foster himself has never hesitated to embrace the Cross though he would not call his sufferings such. Father Kaszinsky on the outskirts of Pittsburgh helped him in the great steel strike of 1919, and called him friend. It was a strike which most of the American labor movement disowned as a ‘Hunky’ strike, engineered by ‘foreign propagandists.’ But Foster is an American… not enemies of the Cross, I thought, as I reviewed in my mind the case of Dorothy Blumberg, whom I had met the day before and brought home to supper at <abbr>St.</abbr> Joseph’s House. She had spent two years in Alderson Federal Penitentiary… convicted as one of the ‘top’ Communists… in the struggle ahead is it the capitalist or the Communist who will be easier to convert?” Then Dorothy told of my five Communist delegate friends from Wisconsin who came to Our place for supper and said it was the best meal they had in New York City. And Gurley Flynn’s sister was there too. I also met Alfred Wagenknecht whom I had not seen since 1917 when I was secretary of the Socialist Party in Columbus, and he was state secretary of the party in Ohio.</p>
			<p>The <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> opposed the execution of the Rosenbergs and we have had several articles against the continued imprisonment of Morton Sobell, and we have had <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sobell speak to us. I tried to visit Morton in Atlanta but was not allowed inside. About this time Mike Gold in his column in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Daily Worker</i> mentioned Dorothy and me whom he had known all these years, and our voluntary poverty, pointing out that, “Money has become the opium of the American people. Not religion, or art, or science, but the fast buck is the topic of most conversation here.”</p>
			<p>Whenever I have had a Saturday night free I have gone to the Libertarian League on Broadway where they had their dinners once a month, with Spanish and Italian cooking. Later this group split up and the younger folks are on <abbr>St.</abbr> Mark’s Place and the older ones on John Street. I have spoken on how an anarchist could be a Catholic several times before them, and Dorothy has also spoken to them. Most of these good comrades are of Italian and Spanish Catholic upbringing but do not feel at home in the Church because of the support by the Church in Spain and Italy of the exploiter.</p>
			<p>The anarchist paper, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Individual Action</i>, which had a short life of three years and in which I wrote a column, had discussion by readers about my being a Catholic. In the English anarchist weekly <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Freedom</i> there was also a discussion about my being a Catholic. One of their main contributors said, in speaking of different kinds of anarchists: “B is an out-and-outer of a different sort, rather like our friend, Ammon Hennacy in America. He pays no taxes and arranges his life to avoid any compromises with the state. He is a tireless propagandist who ‘lives out” his anarchism.”</p>
			<p>Milton Mayer in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Progressive</i> has often mentioned my absolutist position and of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> he says, “The <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> is the best anything in America.” Once Eileen Egan invited me to speak to a small group of students from Viet Nam. I was introduced and later a girl said, “Glad to meet you Mr. Heresy.” So at the office I am called “Father Heresy” at times. Donald McDonald of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Davenport Messenger</i> had written an article saying that the works of mercy of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> and the life of Dorothy was fine, but to pay no attention to Hennacy and pacifism and anarchism. I wrote a reply but it was not printed. Later I met him in Milwaukee and he said in his column, in part: “As often happens people are never quite what we imagine them to be when we judge them only on what they have written, and on what others have written or said about them. I half guessed that Ammon Hennacy who is now 66, would be a gaunt, thin, emaciated man in beggars rags. Instead he is well-built, healthy looking, and has a quickness of movement and an alert responsiveness that one usually finds in men half his age… I had also thought that Ammon might be dogmatically insistent on non-essentials and relativistic about the basic principles of Christian life. He did mention his vegetarianism, his non-smoking and non-drinking, but not in the manner of an aggressive zealot. And with respect to the irreducibles of Faith and morals, he gave no indication of any compromise or easy tolerance.… It seemed clear to me that this man, who has suffered a great deal (inside and outside of jails) for his convictions, does not hate any man. I am sure I could not say the same, with any confidence, about certain other Catholics whose ‘orthodoxy’ is beyond reproach… Is Ammon Hennacy sure in his own mind that his anarchism and pacifism are the answers to universal war and hate? I do not know. But of one thing he is sure, and that is that he must bear constant and personal witness to what he thinks is right. Perhaps few of us are called to bear the same kind of witness as Ammon Hennacy’s. But I would think that all of us are obliged to achieve the indomitable quality of Ammon’s perseverance and the generosity of his charity.”</p>
			<p>While I was in Sandstone prison, Murray Kempton of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper"><abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> Post</i>, had a column about me entitled “Ammon and the Wolf,” quoting from my column in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> about conditions there and giving my history. He said that “I hadn’t realized how much touch I’ve lost with the consequential lately until I found out that Ammon Hennacy had been in and out of prison for five months with me none the wiser… I cannot believe that Sandstone will ever be the same. It is obviously a sound policy for our society to keep Ammon Hennacy moving along.”</p>
			<p>In 1956, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Time</i> magazine interviewed Dorothy and asked her when she, as representing the furthest left a Catholic could be, would ever get together with the right wing <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Brooklyn Tablet</i>. She said “at the Communion rail.” <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Time</i>, on July 22, 1957, had this item: “Led by Roman Catholic Pacifist-Anarchlst Dorothy Day, ten members of the Catholic Worker movement (<i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Time</i>, March 12, 1956) were arrested for failure to take shelter during Manhattan’s civil-defense drill. After registering their disobedience as ‘a matter of conscience and a refusal to take part in what amounts to a deliberate campaign of psychological preparation for war,’ they were each sentenced in Manhattan arrest court to 30 days in jail.”</p>
			<p>Another time a few years ago, according to the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper"><abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> Times</i>, report of a Communion Breakfast following Mass at <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s Cathedral “Father Kelleher, pro-synodal judge of the ecclesiastic tribunal of the Archdiocese of New York… praised Dorothy Day at a saint.”</p>
			<p>Various right wing Catholic papers call Dorothy and me Communists, and some priests and laymen have said that they have definite information that Dorothy was at present a card carrying member of the Communist Party. Many of the clergy have praised us for our ideals and have told us to never give up our struggle for real Christianity. <abbr>Prof.</abbr> John <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Abbo of the Catholic University of America is the author of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Political Thought: Men and Ideas</i>, published by the Newman Press, with the Imprimatur of the Archbishop of Baltimore. He has some pages on Anarchism, and after discussing Bakunin and Kropotkin, and Tolstoy, he says: “A similar theory, although highly personalized and interpreted with a touch of Thoreau’s and Gandhi’s ideas and ideals, is preached by the American Ammon Hennacy, a Catholic pacifist, and some of his associates in ‘The Catholic Worker’ movement. Hennacy’s principles and beliefs are interestingly told in his <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Autobiography of a Catholic Anarchist</i>. The following is a recent statement of Hennacy on his group’s doctrine and policy:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>We are motivated by Christ and <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis to a life of voluntary poverty with no reliance upon bullets or ballots or formal organization to achieve our ideals.… We feel that we have creatively used Gandhian dialectic in taking the thesis of the Counsels of Perfection of the early Christians as contrasted to the antithesis of the acceptance of the industrial-capitalist system by most of the clergy today; and we have emerged with the synthesis of living poor, in the vanguard of civil disobedience to air-raid drills, payment of income taxes for war, and in the absolutist stand of refusal to register for the draft creating… the new society “within the shell of the old.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Steve Allen in his Autobiography, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Mark It and Strike It</i>, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1960, says on page 167: “Man has always done rather well when it comes to the formalities of religion; he will willingly burn incense, sacrifice lambs, make pilgrimages, bow to Mecca, light candles, sing hymns, march in processions, mutter prayers often without thought to their meaning, flagellate himself, make certain signs and gestures, tithe his salary, and all the rest of it, but he will usually be God-damned (if you will pardon a play on words in this paradox) if he will love his neighbor.… Because of this I admire tremendously a Christian like Ammon Hennacy, the penniless Catholic pacifist, more than I admire, say, two high churchmen who stand on opposite sides of a boundary of war and bless the killers (some reluctant, some not) who advance toward each other’s throats. I sympathize with such prelates, however. It must be very difficult, if one is trapped by office and circumstance, not to commit the absurdity of blessing Mussolini’s bombers.”</p>
			<p>Just now we are mailing out an appeal for money and the outer office is filled with men and women of the Bowery who are stamping envelopes, and in a few days they will be putting stamps and stenciled addresses on them and inserting our appeal. The custom is to buy cigarettes, candy, ice cream, <abbr>etc.</abbr> as a sort of thank you each afternoon when this extra work, and the mailing of the paper, is done. Most of these folks do not believe our radical ideas, and some are very opposed to them, but they feel that the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> is “our paper.” Last week we had published the fact that we returned $3,500 interest to the city on the money paid to us for our Chrystie Street house which was torn down for the subway. Some in the office said, “They send back this money to the city and now they beg; I don’t understand it.”</p>
			<p>One of the last to leave at night is a middle-aged woman from the middle west who sweeps out the place; and one of the first to come in the morning is an aged Irishman who sweeps out the inner office and empties wastepaper baskets. Italian Mike is big and heavy but he walks to the Ninth Street bakery every day for bread and to the Fulton market for fish on Fridays. And George has enough energy to run a whole restaurant, but considers that being “head waiter” here is satisfactory.</p>
			<p>Before I went to prison in Sandstone, a reporter came in and asked questions about the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. He said he was writing a book. I have had many like this and never heard from them again. What was my surprise to find upon my release, a chapter devoted to this interview entitled, “Give Us, Miss Day, Our Daily Bread,” being in a book, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">The Bowery Man</i>, by Elmer Bendiner, Thomas Nelson … Sons, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> 1961. He was former managing editor of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">The Nation</i>. This book presents an interesting history of The Bowery from pre-revolutionary days, with a score of illustrations. He interviewed “Mission-stiffs” and contrasts the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> treatment of the Bowery man with the Bible-banging of the missions. I told him about the Shy Apostle, and of some of the frauds we have to contend with.</p>
			<p>He quotes me as saying that a man asked me if I didn’t know that he was a fraud. I can’t remember the answer I gave, but I suppose I did say, “That’s one problem you can’t bring to us, Mac. If you’re a fraud, that’s between you and God.” I go around at a merry gait and I never thought of myself having time to relax, but Bendiner says I “have the relaxed self-confidence of a man who knows he is right.” He says that I seldom give money to panhandlers for “they drink just to keep on dying.” He says that “until Babylon is broken up into idyllic communes under the banners of The Green Revolution, this little band will go on operating its charity and its paper with the blithe confidence that comes from knowing that nothing can be done about anything in this worst of all possible systems.”</p>
			<p>Salt Lake City readers can get this book at the University library, for I gave them a copy when I first came here, along with the first edition of my Autobiography.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
