<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<p> [Editor’s note: there is no chapter 9] </p>
		<section id="chapter10" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 10</h2>
				<h3>Work⁠–⁠Fast⁠–⁠Picketing⁠–⁠Maryfarm Retreat</h3>
				<h3><abbr>Jan.</abbr> 1, 1952⁠–⁠<abbr>Sept.</abbr> 21, 1952</h3>
				<h4>Phoenix⁠–⁠New York City</h4>
			</header>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>“It’ll rain; it always has.”</h3>
				<p>This has been the assertion of the Old Pioneer for half a century, when the fainthearted ones thought Arizona would dry up and blow away. He had studied the data compiled by scientists as to rain and drought, by means of the growth of rings each year as recorded in the tree stump. Our well, here, had to be deepened twice recently, and all around us farmers were drilling again, as the water level lowered. We were 350 miles away from the Hopi, who prayed for rain and got it; we believed in machines, not in prayer.</p>
				<p>In the last three days of August, it commenced to rain; roads were flooded and insufficient water sewers in the cities were overflowing. One man, who had memories of the drought of years ago, walked in his shirt sleeves on the main street of Phoenix in the rain, whistling and saying, “Ain’t it wonderful?” When the Old Pioneer went to town, the average person scowled at him, as if he had brought the rain because he had never been a Jonah of despair. I took these three days, when there could be no work in the fields, to clean up my cottage and file my correspondence of the previous year, for I had worked every day, except when picketing or visiting the Hopi. Of course, the water did fill up the dams, and it was wonderful for the state as a whole.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Irrigating</h3>
				<p>By the drilling of the barley crosswise, instead of the length of the quarter mile “lands,” I found, these last few nights, that the water distributed itself with very little trouble, as it did not rush to one side of the land and miss the other side. Several places, where the border had been broken between the lands by this cross drilling, the water would escape from one land to another. By going ahead of the water, and filling in these low spots, the work was made much easier.</p>
				<p><em>“Don’t scatter the water”</em> is one of the important rules to learn about irrigating. Normally there was enough water⁠—150 inches⁠—to irrigate two lands at once but, due to the dryness of the ground and cross planting of the barley, I ran the water on one land at a time. (I only learned this after one night of trying it with two lands at once.) Cindy and her grown daughter came with muddy paws and cold nose to treat me as usual.</p>
				<p>When the farmer brought me new boots the other night, as three pairs had the left boot snagged, I mentioned the fact to the Old Pioneer. He recalled the old days when the irrigator was supposed to furnish his own boots, and if he had none, he was charged a quarter a night rental for the ones used and furnished by the boss. One Mexican would come, once a week, riding on his burro for 38 miles to irrigate a 48 hour stretch, and when he discovered that the Old Pioneer did not charge him the rental for the boots, he was overjoyed.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Mexicans</h3>
				<p>In the old days, when there was little electricity in the outlying districts, and before artificial bottled gas was sold, nearly everyone burned mesquite, as it grew all over the desert. People cut it as they needed it, or Mexicans cut it and sold it. These were the days of carpetbag Governors and officials sent from Washington, <abbr class="postal eoc">D.C.</abbr> One such was a very enterprising and ignorant District Attorney, who asked the Federal Grand Jury to indict Mexicans for cutting mesquite on government land. The foreman of the jury argued that everyone cut mesquite, and to the assertion by the <abbr>D.A.</abbr> that the law plainly said that no timber was to be cut from government lands, and the Mexicans had been caught in the act of cutting this timber and had thus committed a felony, the jury foreman replied that mesquite was not lumber, it was mesquite, for it was not good for anything else, and the work of cutting this thorny tangled mess was a chore which called for calloused hands, and not the soft hands of officials. The ignorant <abbr>D.A.</abbr>, who did not know mesquite from maple, was much put out because common men argued with him instead of obeying him. The jury refused to indict the Mexicans.</p>
				<p>The other day the headline ran: “Five Arizonians killed in battle in Korea.” Four out of the five bore Spanish names. We stole this part of the country from their forefathers (other than the small Gadsen purchase). We kept them impoverished by our seasonal scheme of work and low wages, so that they do not have the education and the knowhow of gaining bulletproof jobs in the armed forces, as do many of the whites. Hence their high rate of casualties. They are denied admission to clubs and lodges, and some unions.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>At the State Fair</h3>
				<p>Other years, I had worked one night at the State Fair, taking care of Jersey cows for the Husseys, for whom I irrigate. This year I worked eleven nights straight, from 7 to 7, for Hussey and three others, having 72 cattle in my charge. They were there for show, and they had to be clean, so it was up to me to see that any fresh manure was removed at once. One man wanted to know what we fed cows to produce homogenized milk. I had a notion to answer a fool according to his folly, to the effect that homogenized milk came from one teat, regular milk from another, cream from the third, and buttermilk from the fourth, but could not do so with a straight face, so I explained to him that homogenizing was done by a machine, and that cream was put through this process, and thus “stretched,” so that a big cream line in a bottle did not necessarily mean anything. These Jerseys tested from 4.8 to 6% butterfat, while the kind of milk you buy at the store is about the legal standard of 3.4%. My daughters were brought up on unpasteurized Jersey milk, from our own cow in Wisconsin, and had seldom been ill. I had worked in a milk plant in Albuquerque, and I knew how skim milk was added to regular milk to increase the profits. There is also a racket in this milk business, the same as with white bread. It is not the desire to protect the health of the customer that makes for pasteurizing milk, but the desire for profits. To cook the milk to kill all the supposedly bad germs would require from 175 to 200 degrees, but this would prevent the cream from rising, so it is processed at 145 degrees, which is just sufficient to keep it from spoiling for the several days it may be on the market.</p>
				<p>From midnight until 4 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> things were quiet, but there would always be a few cows that needed attention. On the second night, I heard a disturbance, and sure enough a heifer calf had just been born. I felt at once to see if there was any remnant of the skin bag, that had held the calf, covering its nose to prevent breathing, but all was well, and in an hour the calf was walking around. I lengthened the rope of the mother so she could lick the calf. It did not seem to know its own mother, and bothered all the other cows, so it was taken away. Besides, the milk was too strong, and had to be diluted for the calf. A few rows down the barn, twin Holsteins were born another night, and they were a source of delight to the children.</p>
				<p>One night, I was surprised to receive a visit from Oliver Huset and wife. He had read an article of mine on the Doukhobors in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Retort</i>, in 1942, and had visited them in Canada. He had been a smokejumper in <abbr>CPS</abbr> for four years, and had corresponded with me from Montana, but I had lost track of him in recent years. He was anarchistic, and we had much to talk about as he accompanied me on my rounds over the barn. I wondered how he had found me. He said that he heard I was in Phoenix, and, not finding my name in the phone book, had called the Internal Revenue Department, and asked them if they knew of a person by the name of Hennacy who did not pay income taxes. My prayers for the tax man must have been of some avail, for they gave him my address obligingly.</p>
				<p>My work was at the end of the barn, next to the free show given each evening at 8:30. There were Hopi and Apache dancers, hillbilly antics, dancing girls, acrobats, and jugglers. The girls came in and practiced their handsprings in the barn, but, at the age of 58, my mind was on other matters. The juggler and his wife sat on bales of hay between acts. He juggled six Indian clubs with ease. In conversation with him, I learned that he had been all over the world, and had given a free exhibition in Atlanta prison when Debs was there. I gave him a copy of the September <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> with my One Man Revolution article, and he was pleased to read other copies which I gave to him later. He mentioned that at Le Havre, France, he had put on his act for the soldiers, and saw them with trunks full of paper money which was no good outside of France. He inferred that our Truman currency had not reached that level, as yet.</p>
				<p>The Fair was in the first part of November, and the mornings were cool enough, but I never could get used to sleeping more than four hours. It took me two hours to get to work at the Fair, so from Friday morning to Monday morning I only slept two hours, on Sunday afternoon, after selling <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s. As long as I was busy working Saturday, I was not sleepy. One night I missed the bus, and walked seven miles into town to get to work. In the morning, I had three quarters of an hour to wait for a Tolleson bus, so I sold <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s on the street corner. One man who bought a copy had been head of the Holy Name Society in Los Angeles, but had never heard of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. He was much pleased to learn of such a paper. One Sunday morning, waiting at the Fairgrounds for a bus, I was talking to a man who was the brother of a Universalist preacher by the name of Kenneth Patton, who had refused to pay taxes for war, but had had the tax taken from his bank account. I gave this man extra copies of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> to send to his brother. Another man asked about work. I pointed out the cotton trucks that were passing by, and he answered: “I’ll be damned if I’ll ever pick cotton. I’d starve first. $1.75 an hour or nothing for me.” It seemed that the most recent $1.75 in his possession had gone for liquor, so I left him as he muttered about the low wages in Arizona. I work for 75¢ an hour, and some Mexican nationals get 60¢ and 70¢. Some of the men in the barn who worked daytime slept there at night. In the morning, about 5 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr>, this vegetarian still liked the smell of the bacon, which they prepared for themselves on a hot plate. I waited until I made my own buckwheat cakes at home.</p>
				<p>Although the Republican Governor Pyle is a man of kind words to all, and of a religious mien, his backers in the state are ultraconservative cattle, copper, cotton, and citrus growers. He appointed a new manager of the State Fair who, either from stupidity or from habit as a “free enterprise stooge,” awarded the contract for lunches for members of the school bands to a scab restaurant in town, where there was a picket line. This was done without bids, and a picket line was thrown at the Fair entrance. Very obligingly, the only Republican judge in the county issued an injunction against the picketing.</p>
				<p>This disturbance had about died down, when a <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr> friend of the Hopi village of Oraibi communicated to the Governor the displeasure of the Hopi towards the huge 60-foot kachinas erected at the Fair, with bows and arrows in their hand. He explained that the Hopi were never in a war, and were peaceful people, and that this special kachina was a particularly peaceful one denoting Life, instead of death. The proper emblem should be an evergreen branch, symbolizing life. The change was quickly made. In this case I think it was not malice, but ignorance on the part of the Fair management.</p>
				<p>At the same time, an appointment was made for the traditional Hopi to visit the Governor during Fair week, as some of them would be taking part in the weaving and silversmith exhibits. Accordingly, at 2:30 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> on a Tuesday, I accompanied my friends and a dozen other Hopi to the office of the Governor. Head men spoke of the traditions for peace, non-cooperation with the government, and of their dislike of being forced to take up with the decadent ways of the white man. Dan spoke for the big rebel village of Hotevilla, Andrew spoke for Shongopovi, and Seyestewa spoke for Mishongnomi. David, the weaver at the Fair, heard the Governor say that perhaps, in about 25 years, the state would take over the Indian lands from the Federal government for a time, and then the Indians could own their own lands individually like white men, although they might not necessarily have to pay taxes to the state, as had been mentioned by the papers before. The Governor also said that many young Indians wanted better clothing, and housing, and medical care, and that he listened to their requests. Now he was hearing from the traditionalists, who wanted the old ways. What was he to do? David answered by saying, among other things, “Beware of the Greeks bearing gifts.”</p>
				<p>The two reporters present gave fair accounts of the conference, although they could not do the subject justice, as they did not understand the Hopi background. The following day another reporter gave an entirely false picture of the traditional Hopi, after interviewing the stooge government employee Hopi. They tried to picture these traditionalists as crazy old men, and as being subverted by radicals. In fact the Governor must have been advised to this effect by his conservative backers, for, after the conference, he called the interpreter for a private conversation, and asked him if he knew that both the white man who had accompanied them to the conference and the Japanese who had driven them down from Hopiland in his car were anarchists, who had done time for refusing to fight for their country. The interpreter said he was of the same belief, so the Governor got little comfort. (The Hopi who had driven them down had a slight Oriental cast of features, so the Governor or his informants thought this was George Yamada.)</p>
				<p>About this time, Rik wrote a masterful letter exposing the thieving plans of the whites, and stating that the issue was not whether the Hopi had better clothing, but whether their way of life was to be subverted by materialistic conquerors. By some accident, this letter was published in the local paper, which had editorialized to the effect that this was Only One World, and the Hopi had to get along the way the white man wanted.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Anarchist and the Banker</h3>
				<p>My friend Frank Brophy, President of the Bank of Douglas, asked me to be on the air with him, as the regular man was away. The program was announced ahead, the announcement stating that a real anarchist and a real banker would be on the air. Accordingly, I wrote a five minute talk, and gave it in advance to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brophy. He wrote a reply. Then we went to the station to record these talks, and to ad lib for the remainder of the fifteen minute program. It was on Station <abbr>KOOL</abbr>, 8:45 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 3, 1951. The following is substantially what was said on the air:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brophy― I expect <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy, that this is the first time that an anarchist and a banker sit at the same table without the anarchist having a bomb or the banker tearing the shirt off his back. What do you say <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy?</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy― <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brophy, I say that in Russia the enemy of the common man is the Communist and the bureaucrat. In this country the enemy of the common man is the capitalist and the bureaucrat. Just as the pickpocket cries “stop thief,” pointing to someone else in the crowd, so do apologists for the capitalists in this country cry “Communist” to call attention away from their own picking of our pockets. … Every step in the boasted high standard of living and “American Way of Life” that has been achieved has been bitterly fought at Homestead, the Haymarket, and by the frame-up of such men as Mooney and Billings, and Sacco and Vanzetti, and is epitomized by the lifelong history of Debs, fighting first for the railroad workers and then for all workers. It was the radicals such as these and their forerunners, Thoreau and Bronson Alcott, who did the fighting for this American Way of Life.</p>
					<p>This is the way that the radical analyzes the economic situation: the workingman receives a certain wage and can therefore only buy back that much. But machine production constantly increases so that there is a great surplus. When the saturation point is reached production is stopped and we have a depression. Or the goods are sold in foreign countries less developed than we are. The quarrel over these markets brings about war which seemed to be the approved method these days of getting rid of our surplus.</p>
					<p>The radical says that no matter what pious wishes and prayers we may indulge in, depressions and wars will continue in greater and greater devastation until we get rid of the capitalist system and put one of cooperation and production for use and not for profit in its place.</p>
					<p>There are various ways of accomplishing this aim. The Communist says to organize workers in political parties in order to gain control of the government and have the government run the industries under a Dictatorship of the Proletariat. Then the state will wither away and we will have peace and prosperity for all. At times when the Communists think they can succeed, they do not wait for a legal parliamentary change but use violence, as we did in 1776 to get free from England. (As between fellow Irishmen, it is a long time and we are not free yet.) The main thing wrong with the Communist plan as it works out is the state does not wither away⁠—those who wither away are those who do not buckle to the Dictatorship. And furthermore, there is no peace, but war.</p>
					<p>There remains one other method⁠—that of the anarchist. As for this bomb you talk about, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brophy: today Truman and the government are the biggest bomb throwers. Anarchists quote the Catholic Lord Acton⁠—“Power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely”⁠—and therefore no one should have power over others. As the state is founded on the power of the police and the soldier, they would do away with the state by refusing to obey it. Many anarchists talk loudly of the violence they will commit, but it is mostly talk. Anarchists like the Russian Tolstoy, the Italian Malatesta, the Englishman William Morris, and the American William Lloyd Garrison were also believers in the ethics of the Sermon of the Mount and against the use of violence and war.</p>
					<p>I am myself in this category and call myself a Christian Anarchist. The Christians do not like it because I belong to no church and decry their approval of capitalism and war. The anarchists do not like it because I quote Jesus, <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis, and Gandhi, and write in the Christian Anarchist Paper, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Catholic Worker</i>. We would, by our action of non-cooperation with the government and war, and by our cooperation in useful production, create, as the <abbr>I.W.W.</abbr> preamble says, “a new society within the shell of the old.” This is a slow process but built upon the rock of brotherhood of man and the Fatherhood of God and not on the shifting sands of politics and nationalism.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brophy, if all the Communists would die we would still have this problem of capitalist non-producing parasites living off the rest of us.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brophy― <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy, it appears to me that you may be beating a dead horse. Many people will be shocked at the idea that capitalism is dead⁠—or at least moribund shall I say, but that is the way I feel about it. England was the leading capitalist nation of the world at the beginning of this century. Now what is England? She has become an out-and-out Socialist state, with a powerful but little known Communist group working within which hopes eventually to push England into outright Communism. For many years Norway and Sweden have been semi-Socialist states. Germany and Italy were National Socialist states before the last war and today both are undoubtedly closer to Communism than to Capitalism. And how about our own country? The Democratic party which was supposed to be the guardian of the magnificent Jeffersonian dream of the American Democracy, has now become the captive of the Socialist, Collectivist, and Communistic groups in this country. Of course, rank and file of the party do not realize this yet, but that does not alter the fact of the matter. The American Labor Party in New York with strong, Communist connections for example, is occasionally in the position of being able to decide elections there, and I think the record will indicate that it has always been in favor of the Democratic ticket. Former Vice President Wallace, Senators Pepper, Benton, Humphries, Lehmann, Murray, and Representative Marcantonio are listed as Democrats. However, if you were to check their voting records I think you will find that what they favor is some sort of collectivized or Socialist state. Certainly it is not capitalism as you understand it.</p>
					<p>Anyway, you and I come closer to some agreement when you speak of war. You believe that wars are fought over markets, and that is one of the abuses of the Capitalistic system. To that I would first say that such wars are the product of Imperialism rather than of Capitalism⁠—but since the Imperialists were mostly Capitalists I suppose you might say I am quibbling. However, the point I wish to make is this: Call them the wars of Imperialism or Capitalism if you like, but for the most part they were 19th Century struggles or early 20th Century. Today wars are fought to retain power in the hands of bureaucrats and dictators. That is a curious change which has come about in the past twenty years, and I doubt if the dumb Republicans have discovered it yet. That’s why I can’t be too hard on a mere Christian Anarchist.</p>
					<p>Let me just quote a few lines from a Washington financial service that came to my desk this week. It was speaking of the Administration’s approach to various difficult economic and employment problems that it will have to face before the next election. I quote: “This is the basis for many rumors in Washington (and some originating in surprising places) that the Administration does not now want a truce in Korea.” If there is any truth in such speculation that does not sound much like a Capitalistic war to me.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy― Capitalism already dead. You mean it wants to make us all dead. Capitalists are the pawns of the bureaucrats. Nonsense! Does anyone seriously affirm that the President today bosses Standard Oil, Du Pont, Ford, General Motors? He may worry them somewhat and make them do some extra bookkeeping. His friends get mink coats and deep freezes, but nothing like Reynolds Aluminum’s getting a 32 million dollar plant for six million. Call it Capitalism or not, it is an evil thing. It surely does not make for peace and prosperity.</p>
					<p>Wars are caused, of course, by the selfishness and greed of men, but unless these are organized in a state they would never result in more than a McCoy-Hatfield feud. It takes a state with taxes from Christians to make <abbr>A</abbr>-Bombs. It takes a state with politicians seeking power to make wars. It takes a state giving fat contracts and a guarantee of increased wages as a bribe to workers to make the munitions of war.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>(Just then when we were off the air, “that man’s getting the best of you Brophy, you’d better wake up,” said the owner of the station who was listening to us. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brophy asked me, “What’s the best objection to your idea?” “Ask me how the hell I am going to get my ideas in effect,” I replied.)</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brophy― Well, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy, it looks as though you and I both agree that “our common enemy is the state,” as Albert Jay Nock has written. As you say, the state does not just wither away. It grows, while the helpless citizen watches it grow, and as it grows in importance the individual citizen diminishes. I suppose you and I are what our Socialistic and New Deal friends would call rugged individualists. You, a Christian Anarchist, and I, a Christian Banker, if there is such a thing. After all, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy, as an anarchist it is up to you to get rid of the state. What I want to know is how you are going to do it.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy― That’s easy. If you want to change things you have to get 51% of the ballots or the bullets. If I want to change things I just have to keep on doing what I am doing, that is: Every day the government says “pay taxes for war.” Every day I do not pay taxes for war. So I win and they lose. The One Man Revolution⁠—you can’t beat it. The only revolution that is ever coming, as the poet Robert Frost says.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brophy― I’m inclined to agree with you again, but when I think of the One Man Revolution I think of it in terms of individual revolution rather than in terms of political action. If, for instance, everyone in the country had a one man revolution himself and gave up greed, chiseling, and the other vices that all lead to war, then perhaps the good world that you and I both dream about might come to be.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy― Anarchists do not believe in political action. Anarchists do not need a cop to make them behave. Amen, brother.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brophy― <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy, I cannot allow an anarchist to have the last word, so I will say, Amen.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>During the summer I received a letter from Carl Owen, a young man who came from a KKK atmosphere in South Carolina. He had openly refused to resister but no one in his vicinity had paid any attention to it. His state has a heritage of revolt, so perhaps one who did not jump when Washington called was not to be handed over at once. He had hiked to a Quaker seminar at Sedona, <abbr class="postal">Ariz.</abbr>, and had been arrested and held for not carrying a draft card, at the same spot where my friend Jack Hewelcke had been arrested for the same reason in 1946. This was on the mesa, just west of Albuquerque. Carl had read Emerson in high school, and somehow got away from his provincial surroundings. He had played around with the Progressive Party, being on their national platform committee in 1948. A Quaker lady had sent him a clipping of my One Man Revolution article in the <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 1951 <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. Now, in <abbr>Feb.</abbr> of 1952, he came to visit me for a few weeks, before he was to report in Albuquerque for trial. We dug ditches and trimmed trees together.</p>
				<p>Carl was not a “sleeper” in the sense that the Old Pioneer meant, when someone had called me on the phone, and I had asked who it was, and he replied: “One of your sleepers I suppose.” But after a day’s work, I never knew a fellow so hard to awaken as Carl; you literally had to pull him out of bed to get him awake.</p>
				<p>Another time, the Old Pioneer answered, when I asked him if I had any mail: “Only some of your outlaw papers.”</p>
				<p>Carl was not at all religious or anarchistic-minded. He had plenty of courage, and did not need any shot in the arm from me. He was of course interested in my prison history. We had a pleasant time together. He then left for Albuquerque and, on <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 19th, Judge Hatch offered to let him go free, saying that the only proof of his non-registration was his own testimony. This is perhaps the only case on record where a prisoner refused freedom, for, Carl said, if he was for the war his place was in the army, and if he was against it his place was in jail. He acted as his own lawyer, and produced his own testimony that he had violated the law by refusing to register. Papers all over the country reported his sentence of three years in El Reno, <abbr class="postal">Okla.</abbr> prison, but Phoenix papers, true to form, never mentioned it. Carl does not want a parole, and has the makings of a true rebel. At the same time, another young man got three years for refusing to go to war.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Picketing</h3>
				<p>Now, picketing time in March approaches. As usual, I had sent letters to the chief of police, the tax man, and the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr>, telling them that I was going to picket; that what I was doing was clearly subversive, but not more so than usual; that they should make up their minds what they were going to do about my activities, and not make themselves look silly by pinching me, and then letting me go to picket again, as they had done previously. I sent copies of these letters to the local press, and, inasmuch as they refused to mention my name last year, I was surprised to see in the morning paper, two days before my picketing (March 12), the headline on the front page of the second section:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<h4>One Man Revolt Enters Its Ninth Year</h4>
					<h5>One Against 150,000,000</h5>
				</blockquote>
				<p>After giving the facts about my letter to the authorities, the article added:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>The <abbr>U.S.</abbr> attorney’s office says there’s no jail penalty for refusing to pay taxes. But a fraudulent return can be punished by a prison term. The city police say there’s no law against picketing. The <abbr>FBI</abbr> says Hennacy’s acts are not within its jurisdiction. And the revenue collector says his office can’t prove Hennacy earned $1,701.91, or owes $192 in taxes. But that’s not all; unless Hennacy has attachable property, the only thing that could be done would be to assign a tax agent to trail him and levy on a day’s pay or change from current tendered in any purchase, “and that,” opines Stuart, “would cost thousands of dollars.” So, it’s still one against 150,000,000.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>A few days later a radio demagogue, who specialized in calling all people Communist who were a little left of center, received a phone call on his “We the People” program. This person asked if it would not be a good thing to tar and feather radicals, so people would know who they were. The commentator said this was rather drastic, but on the other hand, it might be worth considering.</p>
				<p>I had written the basis for a leaflet entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Why Do You Pay Your Income Tax?</i> Rik, Ginny, and I had spent two nights writing and rephrasing it. Our Hopi silversmith friend and his wife were over, as usual when we develop our picketing propaganda. It is good to have friends who will unmercifully criticize my brainchild. Ginny made the suggestions which made the leaflet a direct, instead of a preachy, emphasis. But on her own, she would never do, for she gets too sentimental. I pay no attention to rules of grammar, but go by the sound and feeling of what I write. Rik puts out neat and tidy mimeograph work and posters, and so has a tendency to want to make my wisecracks grammatical. I tell him that the whole point is lost unless it rings true⁠—grammar or no grammar.</p>
				<p>As a hangover from his days as a Socialist organizer, Rik tends to appeal to the masses, but, after a little argument, agrees with Ginny and me that the true Christian Anarchist must appeal to those about ready to make the next step, and must know that these are very few indeed. Thus, to appeal to the masses, the idea would be to appeal to present day grievances, such as too much regulation, taxes being too high, and not enough pension from the state. And also, not to knock anything which has the approval of the masses, such as churches and the Boy Scouts. The rabble rouser will always be able to get the masses on immediate issues. The Christian revolutionist therefore gives the basic idea of reliance upon self and God, and not upon politicians and the state. We can live and die, and never change political trends, but if we take a notion, we can change our own lives in many basic respects, and thus do that much to change society.</p>
				<p>A generation ago, any minister who talked pacifism would never think of having the militaristic Boy Scouts in his church. Now they all have this group and, as a result, it is difficult for them to question the ethics of their action. Another reason for writing and speaking on basic issues is that the very elect would lead people astray with such fakes as World Government. I have recently read Lewis Mumford’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Conduct of Life</i>, in which he feels the only hope is to have millions support World Government. Aside from the fact that he writes wonderful peace propaganda, in between his support of wars, this refusal to accept the reality of “the density of the population” precludes any serious attention being paid to his well-written optimism.</p>
				<p>My Picketing Leaflet read as follows:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<h4>Why Did You Pay Your Income Tax?</h4>
					<h5>Is it because you think that taxes, like death are inevitable?</h5>
					<p>I know the decision to pay taxes is a voluntary one because I have openly refused to pay my tax for the past nine years. This year alone I owe $192.</p>
					<h5>Is it because you feel that you are protecting yourself against war with Russia?</h5>
					<p>Certainly there is a definite connection between war and taxes for from 80% to 90% of your income tax goes to pay for war past, present, and future. As a conscientious objector in both World Wars I believe that war is destroying us and has actually created the Russian Communist threat. The poverty and misery of the Czarist Empire culminated in the First World War (with Russia on the side of the Allies) and brought the Communist state into being. The world wide destruction, poverty, and totalitarianism of the Second World War (with Russia on the side of the Allies) made the Soviet Union a world power and a real threat to our military machine and our capitalist aspirations.</p>
					<p>The Marshall Plan and our attempt to arm the non-Communist world has directed the hate and distrust of our allies towards us. By trusting in our own armed power instead of trusting in God we have created the very conditions which are helping promote Communist Russia: the conditions of insecurity, fear, and hate. The poor of Europe are tired of fighting. The wealthy classes there have used our money to retain their Asiatic possessions and to fill their own pockets. The “Voice of America” tells those behind the Iron Curtain to revolt and boasts of the freedom in capitalist America. But with our loyalty oaths and with the building of new concentration camps (two of them in Arizona), we are rapidly becoming a Police State like Russia. Here in Arizona even druggists must now sign loyalty oaths … next it’ll be undertakers and corpses!</p>
					<p>This nation was settled by many folks from Europe who sacrificed everything to escape religious despotism and the tyranny of military conscription. While we have achieved separation of church and state we are more in danger of a military despotism than ever. The early Christians refused to be soldiers and some of them are official saints of the Catholic church for this reason. When they were thrown to the lions in the Roman arena they died singing. Truly “the blood of the martyrs was the seed of the church.” Today most Christians join the Lions Club, or Rotary, sing “for he’s a jolly good fellow,” and die respectably of ulcers. They bless war, and their churches are built out of the profits of an unjust economic system. If we continue in this manner war and income taxes will be the death of us yet.</p>
					<h5>Do you pay your income tax because you are afraid of the sacrifice that trust in God and opposition to the state may involve?</h5>
					<p>I decided long ago that while all of us must die I could choose something worthwhile to live for and die for. You might as well die for what you do believe as for what you don’t believe. Remember that Johnson said to Boswell, “Courage is the greatest virtue, for without it you cannot practice the other virtues.”</p>
					<p><em>If you want a better world</em> you will not get it by trying to make men out of Congressmen through writing them letters, by voting for any politician since they all believe in war, or by expecting very much of a World Government composed of these same ignoble politicians. Neither will the mocking of God by saying prayers for peace while making munitions and paying taxes for war be of much avail. That kind of prayer bounces back!</p>
					<p>If you want to think a little further about this, here are the first steps (you will know in your heart what is right for you): Study the Sermon on the Mount, and the lives of such dedicated men as <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis, George Fox, Tolstoy, and Gandhi. Try to make whatever you do coincide with Christ’s teachings. Ask yourself whether returning evil for evil in courts, legislatures, prisons, and war is not denying Christ. If your answer is yes then stop doing it. But be honest with yourself. Don’t alibi by saying you have to do this evil for your family’s sake, or blasphemously, for Christ’s sake. Ask yourself whether you are a producer or a parasite. A third of us lead parasitical lives as salesmen, lawyers, bankers, politicians, policemen, or soldiers, or else make a living out of the weaknesses and vices of our fellows. Most of the clergy give a very counterfeit return for their money. In a society based on a return of evil for evil, these jobs may be necessary, but they wouldn’t exist in the society envisioned by Jesus where evil is repaid with good.</p>
					<p>Do you give your children an example of honesty and Christian conduct? Aren’t you really coercing your children into unchristian practices when you boast of your “within the law” business deals, and when you indoctrinate them into giving their first allegiance to the state in such militaristically-motivated organizations as the Boy Scouts, and by banning any textbook that doesn’t praise capitalism and war? If you teach your children to conform at any price, how can you ever expect them to stand upright and self-reliant before men or God?</p>
					<p>To sum up:</p>
					<p><em>Refuse</em> to register for the draft or military training!<br/> <em>Refuse</em> to buy war bonds!<br/> <em>Refuse</em> to make munitions for war!<br/> And when you get around to it,<br/> <em>Refuse</em> to pay taxes for war!<br/> [my name and address]</p>
					<p>If you want a free copy of my letter to the tax collector as reprinted in the <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 1952 <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Catholic Worker</i>, ask me for a copy or write me.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Before starting to picket on March 14th, I said prayers and asked for grace and wisdom at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s, and stopped as usual at the newspaper office to see a reporter friend. It had rained every day all week, and the Old Pioneer wondered if the Lord and the weatherman would favor me, on this, The Ides of March. The day was sunny and not windy. The first person to greet me as I picketed was my banker friend, Frank Brophy. It seems that in this society today, the only free men are ones like myself, who practice voluntary poverty and do not care for money, and the banker who has too much money. Of course, Brophy is an exception, for he speaks out, while most bankers are stupid in everything but collecting money, and do not have the intelligence to express themselves, or the courage to do so. The newly rich are the ones who are scared the worst, and cannot stand any sign of unorthodoxy. I had only brought 377 leaflets and 200 <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s containing my tax statement, thinking this would be more than enough. The first hour I gave away 100 leaflets and 30 <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s, and saw that I would run short.</p>
				<p>This was the day that Senator Taft had announced he would come to town. Around noon, big-shot Republicans commenced to gather at the Westward Ho Hotel, right across the street from my picketing. Soon, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Republican himself, looking out-of-place in a cowboy hat, appeared. Whether he saw my signs or not, I did not know. As a fellow Ohioan, I had written to him telling him that I would be picketing, and enclosing a copy of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> with my tax statement. He may not have received the letter. I had told him that I considered himself and Supreme Court Justice Douglas as men who were fairly honest, and not quite so corrupt as their associates, but that this was very faint praise indeed, and that he was wrong in wanting war in China.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stuart, the head tax man who the headlines, this morning, said would soon lose his job in the reorganization of the Revenue Bureau, greeted me kindly, as did his wife. They had read Dorothy’s book and enjoyed it. One out-of-state tourist good-naturedly wanted to know what my racket was. “The government that is getting the taxes has the racket,” I replied. Several people shouted from cars that I should go back to Russia if I didn’t like this country. My answer that I like this country silenced them. The same employer who always comes in his car, and gives me a little rest by driving around the block, came again today. A reporter from the <abbr class="initialism">AP</abbr> interviewed me, and said a photographer would be around later, and the story would be sent over the country. Ted Lewis, of the <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Daily News</i> introduced himself to me. He was with the Taft entourage, and knew of me through his friend Ed Lahey, Washington correspondent of the Chicago <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Daily News</i>, Detroit <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Free Press</i>, and other Knight papers, who had interviewed the Revenue Department in Washington about my activities, and who had written clever articles about my fight with the government. A reporter on the local paper, who had reviewed Dorothy’s book recently, also introduced himself to me.</p>
				<p>A local writer and radio broadcaster, who, along with the demagogue I mentioned before, makes a living as a red-baiter, spoke to me for about fifteen minutes. I had met him at the Gerald <abbr class="name">L.K.</abbr> Smith secret meeting. His group had announced over the radio that Dorothy, the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, and myself were Communists, and when Dorothy cancelled her engagement here in January, took credit for having frightened her away. Although this red-baiting outfit claims to have the backing of the American Legion and the Catholic church, I know from friends in the Legion, and the many friendly priests here in Phoenix, that these claims are exaggerated. I wrote a letter giving the facts of the matter, and so did Frank Brophy. To our surprise, both letters were read on this red baiting program, with the remark, “No comment.” However I dislike the ideas of a person, I am unable to dislike people, so this man and myself had a pleasant, and not too controversial, conversation. (Later this red-baiter left town).</p>
				<p><em>“I’m a Russian and I think I’m free,”</em> said a beautiful peasant type woman to me. She referred to my large sign: “The Russians Think They Are Free. So Do We.” I asked her if she was a Molokon, and she said she was, mentioning her name, which proved to be also that of my nearest neighbors, who are Molokons. She lived near Glendale, on lateral 20.</p>
				<p>Rik and Ginny attend Quaker meeting here, and brought home a booklet describing the visit of Cadbury and others of the English Quakers to Moscow. I was surprised to learn that the Russians they spoke to thought they were free and we were behind a dollar, or “velvet,” curtain. Of course the ones who had opposed Stalin were already dead or in faraway prison camps, and those remaining did not want any more than they had, so in that respect they were free. It is all a matter of perspective. The pygmies thought they were the biggest people on earth, never having seen anyone else. And the old saying goes: “In the kingdom of the blind, the one-eyed man is king.”</p>
				<p>This booklet gave me the idea for my poster. Here, we are free to vote for one or the other of politicians whose nomination is cooked up beforehand. I am free to picket and, although I am happy that an increasing number of people respond to my propaganda, I know that they are bound by their bourgeois lives to keep on supporting the system, albeit griping now and then.</p>
				<p>The reverse of this big poster read: “The Power to Tax Is the Power to Enslave.” The sandwich sign in front read: “I Choose Not to Pay Income Tax for War and Owe $192 for 1951.” The sandwich sign from rear view quoted my friend of prewar days at the <abbr>U.</abbr> of Wisconsin, Randolph Bourne: “War Is the Health of the State.”</p>
				<p>During the day, about 50 people stopped and warmly congratulated me on my picketing. Later, I learned that a friendly priest had brought another priest from his town to meet me, but had somehow missed me. From the point of view of acceptance of my message, this, the 21st day of my picketing in four years, was the best so far. Rik and Ginny drove along at 5:45, and I took this opportunity to take 50 <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s of the March issue, which had just arrived, to <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis Xavier Church, and to kneel there and give thanks for my successful day. The two Phoenix dailies did not mention my picketing. The Flagstaff daily had an <abbr class="initialism">AP</abbr> story with my picture on the front page. The tax man and his wife own the Prescott <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Courier</i>, and they carried a four-column head on the front page about my picketing. The reports were factual and not a bit slurring. The radio, here, also had decent comment.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Vigilantes</h3>
				<p>Soon after my picketing, and after the tar-and-feather propaganda on the radio, three young men, two of them Mexicans, knocked at the Old Pioneer’s door and asked for “Yancy.” I happened to be there talking on the phone to the Hopi, who had arrived in town, so I told them that I did not know of anyone by the name of “Yancy” but <em>my</em> name was Hennacy.</p>
				<p>“You are the guy then. You put those leaflets about not paying taxes in our car.” Meanwhile I had invited them in and asked them to be seated, but they stood around nervously. I told them that I never leave leaflets in any car; that I gave them to people who took them.</p>
				<p>“Who told you such stories as that? I’ve been selling the paper here for five years in front of Catholic churches and I never would have lasted that long if I was Commie,” I replied, and added: “Who sent you here, and what are <em>your</em> names?”</p>
				<p>“We won’t tell you. We go around all over after such fellows as you. Come outside there on the concrete, and we’ll rub your head in the cement.”</p>
				<p>“What’s the rush? What’s the rush?” I said good naturedly.</p>
				<p>“You are a Communist, and this <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Catholic Worker</i> is a Communist paper, and we don’t like it,” said the leader.</p>
				<p>“If you would beat me to pieces, and if what is in my leaflet is true, and if what is in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Catholic Worker</i> is true, then it would still be true if I was dead. And if it isn’t true, why bother about it?” I asked them. They muttered about my being a Commie, and to come out and take my beating.</p>
				<p>“You can beat me up right here and it doesn’t take three of you; let the smallest one start right now. I won’t hit you back. Go ahead.” I said smilingly. They looked at each other and didn’t make a move, muttering something about me stabbing the boys in Korea in the back by not paying taxes for their guns. I told them of Saul persecuting the Christians and seeing Stephen stoned to death, and the Lord spoke to him later and he became the Apostle Paul. But my words were wasted, for these Catholic boys did not seem to know Paul from Moses. I told them that they oughtn’t to get excited about dying in Korea, for the Americans had taken all of this country, except the Gasden purchase, from their forefathers in the Mexican War.</p>
				<p>“Well if we hadn’t taken it from them, they would have taken it from us” was the not too intelligent reply. They listened to some of my pacifist explanations for an hour, and did not attack me. They asked where I would be selling <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s next Sunday, and I told them at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s, and the leader marked it down on an envelope. As I shook hands with the leader, and they were leaving, Rik and Ginny came in to take me to see the Hopi, who were at their home. I did not know that they were coming so soon. They told me that they saw a gunny sack tied over the license plates of the Vigilante car. These men did not need to fear, for I would not report them.</p>
				<p>The next Sunday, three very husky young men came up to me and, in a surly manner, each bought a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. One was Mexican and the other two were Anglos. They pointed to me and at the paper, and discussed the matter between themselves, but took no action, as there were too many people coming or going at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s. I told those who had been to beat me up that if they could find me on the highway or in the fields working, they could beat me up, if they thought they could solve anything by doing it.</p>
				<p>Several times, downtown, I met two different fellows who looked enough like the leader of the group to have been his brother. Whenever I hear of a person swearing in court that a certain person committed a crime, I am very doubtful. I looked at this man for an hour, and we were not more than two feet apart, yet I could not be sure of this identity. It is now nearly a year since this happened, that I am writing, and I have heard nothing more from the vigilantes. They were not especially vicious, but had been told lies about my being a Communist, so they were not to blame for their action.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Work</h3>
				<p>It is a good thing that I like to do manual labor on a farm. A life of not paying taxes and of voluntary poverty, such as I have set for myself, requires work as a basis. To talk about the dignity of labor, of life on the land, of a vegetarian in his own garden, of refusing to pay taxes, and then to mooch for a living, gives the lie to all conversation. The best feeling that I have had during the past year was to look at the two rows of potatoes which I had laboriously hilled just right, and planted before a storm broke over the mountains and the driving rain made me seek the refuge of my cabin. It happens that I also like to write articles describing my life and my ideas. (I think better as I type.) But the pleasure in writing an article or a book is outdistanced by my work in the garden and the fields. Working for a wage, without enjoying the work that you do, puts you in the class of the rich man who, someone has said, is just a poor man who has money; you are a poor man who makes money.</p>
				<p>During the past ten years I have had nothing to do with those props of capitalism: Rent, Interest, and Profit.</p>
				<p>Today I spent nine hours pulling weeds in our garden, and just before dark I planted two dozen each of eggplant and peppers. I work, but I eat freely from this garden every day of the year.</p>
				<p>For the past six months, I have irrigated barley often, at nights, for Hussey’s. This is really not difficult, for the water runs slowly. The only experience new to me, in this work, is that the sugar and malt in the barley mix with the dew, as I walk through it checking the flow of the water, forming a paste which, when dry, makes my overalls a veritable coat of armor. As usual, Cindy and several other dogs came up with cold noses and muddy paws, but after I had greeted them, they went on their way exploring gopher and skunk.</p>
				<p>Coming to the farmhouse at 7:30 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr>, after my night of irrigating recently, I saw the big bull loose in the open driveway, pawing the earth and snorting. Just then James Hussey, my boss, came up and, walking gently toward the bull, he finally grabbed him by the ring in the nose, and led him captive to the pen. This was the real pacifist way of handling the problem, performed by a reserve army captain. As my grandfather told me: “Don’t run from a bull or a billy goat, they have four legs and you have two, and you can’t make it.”</p>
				<p>On the way home that morning (April 8th), I saw pickers in the strawberry fields. I had always wanted to do this work, but have been too busy. They pay 70¢ an hour now, rather than by the basket, as very few are ripe. I remember eating berries at 10¢ a quart in 1942, in Milwaukee. I tried raising them one year here, but was not successful. They have to be irrigated every four days in the season, and weeds pulled from them the year around. If there is a big head of water on, or if the crop is high enough to impede the water, the regular cement port will not allow enough water to go through, so a low place is left in the bank, where extra water is let through. As with country people, the name given tells just what happens, for this is a “helper.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Personal Responsibility</h3>
				<p>Digging ditch for a neighbor, recently, I heard bottles smash on the highway. Two teenagers had found them along the side of the road, and were smashing them in the middle of the highway.</p>
				<p>“That’s not a damn bit smart,” I shouted at them. They could not see me, and I suppose thinking this was their conscience, or something uncanny, hastened onward. This lack of responsibility belongs not only to youth, for, while irrigating one night, I saw a big car stop on the highway, and a man take out sacks of bottles and junk, and throw them along the side of the road. This was not a slum dweller who had no place to put his garbage, but a big city bourgeois, who seemed to want to save the expense of paying a garbage man to haul his refuse away. A lady wrote a letter to the local paper about a dead cat on the street, and bemoaned the fact that no one came to remove it. A week later she wrote again and the cat was still there. In an anarchist society, each one would be responsible, and would not have to write letters to papers, or to call the cops, to have something done: They would do it themselves. Coming home from helping my friend Joe Craigmyle pick oranges and grapefruit the other night, I mentioned this lady and the cat, and said that, the Sunday before, I had seen a dead cat on the lateral on my way to the bus, but being late, I did not stop to remove it. On my way back in the afternoon, after hundreds of cars had passed, and numerous Mexicans going to the bus, I noticed that the cat was still there, and stopped to throw it off of the road. As we were talking, we noticed a two-by-four with four spikes sticking up on the highway. We swerved around it, and were a quarter of a mile past, when Joe said, as an afterthought to my remark, that this would cause somebody some trouble: “I’ll back up and you can throw it in the ditch.” In my mind, then, Joe, who has not been much of a man of action, rose from a one-cylinder to a two-cylinder anarchist.</p>
				<p>In early summer, when the new crop of citrus is on the trees, the old crop is still there too, and is extra sweet and juicy. The only thing to be careful of is not to knock the blossoms off when picking the old crop. As with apples, there is a “June drop” of small citrus, and this is all nature’s way of providing larger fruit, for if none fell off at all, none of the fruit would be of much size. If a person has time, it is well to thin out fruit, as I did with the dates. When picking grapefruit or oranges, you can tell when they are light. Then they are pithy, and no matter how good they may look on the outside, they are no good inside, and are thrown on the ground while picking. When we return to the fruit stand, the load is graded as to size.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Putting the Worst Foot Forward</h3>
				<p>When traveling around and broke, when my wife and I were hiking, I worked for several years, off and on, selling Fuller brushes in Georgia, California, and Wisconsin. Although I spent a lot of time in radical propaganda, I was always near the head amongst the salesmen in my district. As I did in social work, I broke all of the rules, and yet succeeded. The company wanted salesmen to sell not individual articles but whole sets. All sorts of tricks were used to get the sale. Individual salesmen were given quotas and prizes, and burdened with pep talks. I would never set a quota. If I thought a woman could not afford a flashy article I took more pride in selling her something really better and not so flashy. And I never pressured potential customers. If there was any weakness in the article as to color, size, weight, <abbr>etc.</abbr> for that individual, I admitted it at once and then spoke glowingly of the good points. For if I did not admit any weakness, the customer would not listen to my good points but would be thinking of this glaring weakness.</p>
				<p>Likewise with ideas I admit at the start that myself and those like me are not going to win, for the whole trend is toward the welfare state and bigger and better churches. The trend is not toward individual responsibility and the voluntary poverty and simple life of the early Christians⁠—all the more reason we should keep on trying, though. When I first meet a priest, I tell him I am not a Catholic and how terrible his church is; that the other churches would be just as bad if they knew how. Then I stress the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, the Sermon on the Mount, and Gandhi. I can’t say anything worse, so from then on I am saying something better. If I should hem-haw and dissemble, and say maybe I’m right and maybe I’m wrong, I would not get the attention of the person to whom I am talking. Why waste time talking to sleepy people? I aim to wake them up at the start. If they get scared away by my frankness, they are a weak porridge anyway, who would not stand much of the truth. Of course a person has to be good-natured about it, and quick on the trigger when it comes to answering objections, as when a priest was trying to argue against pacifism by saying that, according to natural laws, a person had to defend himself against a robber, or defend innocent children and the grandmother about to be raped:</p>
				<p>“Do you have a gun, Father?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“Why, no!” he answered.</p>
				<p>“Then you are in an awful fix: you have nothing to depend upon except God!” That ended the conversation and he got the point.</p>
				<p>When someone on the street asks me if the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> is a Communist paper, I answer: “Worse than that, it is Christian anarchist. Best paper in the world. Better read it.” This is Gandhi’s moral jiu jitsu again. The idea is that no matter how strong a man is, he cannot throw you if he cannot get a hold. Likewise when opponents call you names, or go after you violently, the successful method is to never crawl or excuse yourself, but always advance in counterattack that throws your opponent off his mental balance. By answering an objection before it is voiced, you have already made the ammunition of your opponent useless. Do not let your opponent set the norm. Generally a minority is jeered at because they are so small. It is <em>quality</em>, and not <em>quantity</em>, that is the measure. “One on the side of God is a majority,” is the perfect answer, which I have given dozens of times with success.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Selling <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s</h3>
				<p>“Is that the Communist paper that uses the name Catholic, that they tell of on the radio?” four people asked me, one Sunday morning, after the local red-baiter had denounced the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. I told them that it was not Communist, but had been blessed by the Pope, and was the best Catholic paper in the world; to ask the priest about it. They all bought a copy without further argument. “Is that the good Catholic paper that is sold on the streets?” asked a lady as I was selling <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s in front of the bus station. I replied that it must be, for it was the only one sold on the streets. “I’m not a Catholic,” the lady said. “I belong to the Grey Ladies, and we visit hospitals. I have heard patients ask for it. I want ten copies.” One professional man invariably hands me a nickel or dime for a copy, but won’t take it: “Makes me mad to read it. It is all true but what can I do about it?” For a year or more, a certain elderly lady has pointed to me, and told all who would listen that I was a Communist, and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> was a Communist paper. I paid no attention to her. One day, when I was speaking to a Catholic friend who, for some esoteric reason, won’t touch a copy of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> because it opposes Franco, but who stops and talks to me cordially⁠—this woman came up and said that I am a Communist, and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> is a Communist paper. The friend answered, “I have my own bone to pick with the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, but I read it, formerly, for years, and I know Hennacy from his articles for ten years. I am telling you that neither he, nor the paper, is Communist. Ask the priest and he will tell you that I am right.” The red baiter went away grumbling, “Communist, Communist!”</p>
				<p>Another time, a member of the air force was going to Korea in a few days. He was visiting here, coming from New York City. He asked what kind of paper I had, and said that he had never heard of it. I told him that it had been published in his own town for 18 years. The name “Worker” sounded to him like Communist, he said, and he wanted to know if he could ask the priest who was standing nearby about it. He did so, and the priest, who is neither pacifist nor anarchist, answered, “If it’s good enough for me, it’s good enough for you,” showing him the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> in his hand. I spoke to the man for half an hour, and gave him several old copies.</p>
				<p>On a downtown street corner, a soldier with half-a-dozen service bars on his uniform smiled and said that was the kind of paper that was needed: a peace paper, and bought one. Another time a sewer worker from Seattle, a Mormon and a Wobblie, who said he had read the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> in the library, greeted me by name, as he knew I would be the one selling papers on the street in Phoenix. A lady said, “Hello <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy, don’t you remember me?” This was in front of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s. I told her I met many people and did not remember her. She replied, “Why I bought a paper from you last year when I came here for two weeks vacation.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Hopi</h3>
				<p>When my Hopi friends visited, and were able to pick real oranges and grapefruit from trees, to ride up the escalator at Porter’s store, and to see an Indian with feathers sitting there, they were delighted.</p>
				<p>We discussed Governor Pyle’s schemes for getting the Indians to be like white men. In conversation with newspaper and radio men who had known him for years, I got the impression that he is primarily an actor, who sincerely believes that there is no conflict between his religious phrases and attitude and his support of capitalism and war. His talents are a grade above the banjo-playing vote-chaser. He has a pleasing voice, and gracious personality. This could all be true, and yet he would never have an original thought, or never once take a courageous stand against a system of society that degrades whites and Indians alike.</p>
				<p>Did not McKinley make the best stooge Mark Hanna could desire? McKinley prayed to God, and God told him to bring the Bible to the poor Cubans, so we had a war. He did not know there was a sugar trust ready to impoverish the natives and grab the land. He did not know there was a venal Hearst and Pulitzer cooking up a war. Such “innocents” make the best stooges.</p>
				<p>My Hopi friends brought along a copy of <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 1952 <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Crisis</i>, which had an article on the Hopi by our mutual friend, George Yamada. Here the land question is discussed. Governor Pyle deplores the fact that 83% of the land in Arizona is owned by the federal government. What he does not deplore is that too much of this land is rented out, for practically nothing, to his wealthy cattlemen backers. (They bellyache always about government restrictions, but they still lease the land from the government.) The Hopi have only a fourth of the land that they had before the Indian Bureau moved the Navajo in on them. The Navajo were moved in because the cattlemen needed more land. There is plenty of land, but the wrong people have it. The Navajo could easily be given some of this government land, and the Hopi could be given back the land stolen from them. But this will not be done by politicians from Washington.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>For all good causes</h3>
				<p><em>“I don’t wear a label. I’m for all good causes,”</em> replied a young conscientious objector, who, passing through Phoenix, had called the local paper to find my address, and found me one evening when I was caretaker of Jersey cows at the sale of purebreds at the State Fair grounds. Many people write to me, or come to visit me, who are drawn by different phases of my philosophy. So as to save time, I try to find out if their emphasis is <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr>, Catholic Worker, pacifist, anarchist, vegetarian, life on the land, or tax refusal. This slogan of not wearing a label is fine for kids, I told my new friend, but, at his age of 31, he ought to begin to have ideas that lead to some definite belief or action. I admitted that it was a sign of progress for the average person of bourgeois tendencies to look at the Republican and Democratic parties, and to realize that wearing their labels was meaningless. Like the housewife, in the days when women did the baking at home, who put the initials “<abbr class="initialism">T.M.</abbr>” on the top crust of one pie meaning “ ’Tis mince;” and the initials “<abbr class="initialism">T.M.</abbr>” on the top crust of another pie, meaning “ ’Tain’t Mince,” such labels surely did not have any meaning.</p>
				<p>The thought behind my friend’s no-label attitude seemed to be a desire to approach as many people as possible, on the street, in buses, at dances, <abbr>etc.</abbr> and to “make friends and influence people” by not scaring them with such words as “pacifist,” or “anarchist.” He wanted to rattle half-truths and half-criticisms as a build up “for all good causes,” and as a monkey wrench thrown into the status quo. This is a mass approach. Mine has been to get the individual in this mass, if possible, to think. People can be jolted into thinking, but I have yet to see any who have been “maneuvered” into doing anything more than maneuvering.</p>
				<p>I remember 40 years ago, when well-meaning friends had told me that to use the word “Socialist” was defeating my purpose, and that some word such as “Progressive,” that did not have such a bad meaning, should be used. My reply then was that whatever word was used to designate a radical belief, that word would have a bad meaning to those who were being denounced. Today, the word “Socialist” only means collaborationist with war and capitalism, and it has lost all its old radical meaning. Even timid anarchists prefer the word “Libertarian,” for fear they will be called bomb-throwers. I explain “anarchy” means “without-rule;” nothing to do with bombs.</p>
				<p>I told my young friend that he could always get a crowd to applaud mild criticism of war, and for the lowering of taxes and raising of wages, but that this same crowd would really follow the blazing torch of super demagogues who spoke, as did Coolidge, of “the great native intelligence of the common man.” Yes, men by themselves are not so bad, but in a crowd or in a political campaign where they wear “labels,” they are only suckers. I pointed out that spiritual power was the greatest force in the world, and that beside it, all the twopenny political victories did not mean a thing. Too many of us dissipate our energy by being “for all good causes,” attending meetings and passing resolutions, organizing and presenting petitions⁠—all this effort to change <em>others</em>, when if we really got down to it we could use this energy to change <em>ourselves</em>. This can be done by spiritual means, and it does not wear one out, but is invigorating. We become tired radicals because we use our weakest weapon⁠—the ballot box⁠—where we are always outnumbered, and refuse to use our strongest weapon: spiritual power.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Culls</h3>
				<p>As I was helping a farmer polish the horns of his cows for the sale the next day, he said he had heard that I was an educated man, and wondered as to my being a day laborer. I explained my method of working at day work on farms in order that no withholding tax for war should be taken from my pay. He wanted to know more about these ideas, and for the next hour, he heard the words “anarchism” and “pacifism” undiluted by “all good causes,” and departed with the current <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, and my promise to mail him future copies. In contrast, another farmer, whose cows I was attending, wanted me to go back to Russia if I did not like this country.</p>
				<p>The cows for sale were listed in a catalog, with pedigrees and a record of their production of butter fat. The manager of the sale was discussing with one farmer about certain unregistered and non-pedigreed cows which are called “grades,” and many times these cows give more and richer milk than the purebred stock. But there is no guarantee that a heifer from such a cow will be a good producer; more than likely she would be a throwback from scrub stock.</p>
				<p>In Albuquerque, I worked for two men who specialized in extra fancy chickens. At one place, I gathered eggs each hour from a trap nest, and marked the number of the chicken, taken from a leg band, on the egg she had just laid, and also in a record book. Those who did not produce a great number of eggs were thus culled out. “Why feed the culls?” My boss said. Each day a dozen or more hens would die of “blowouts,” which meant that the very efficient egg-producing machine had overstepped itself. The mediocre hens lived longer, and did not blow out.</p>
				<p>At a dairy in Albuquerque where I worked, my job was to go to any of the eight corrals and, in the mud and manure, drive the next string of cows to the barn, to be milked. Nearly every night, a calf would be born in this wet and cold discomfort, and my job was to carry it in the morning to a warm stall. (Josephine, a heifer, had her first calf, which, being a bull, I carried away, and she never saw it again. For months, she followed me, and “mooed” whenever she heard my voice.) Very few of these calves, coming from cows that were “grades,” died. Later, I worked for a multi-millionaire who had highly priced purebreds. My job was to keep a fire in a stove in the barn all night, and to feed these calves eggs, with specially prepared milk. Yet the death rate among these purebreds made my boss groan. Tuberculosis and Bangs disease (premature birth of calves) seem also to be more prevalent among the inbred purebreds.</p>
				<p>Super-efficient bankers jump out of windows when red, instead of black, ink records their business schemes. Efficient assembly line workers go berserk, and we read of an especially good bus driver driving right on to Florida to escape his treadmill of efficiency. At its best, our system is efficient only in turning out quantity, and at its worst, it is trying to bomb us to death. And really, it is not so efficient either, for very expensive garden tools these days are held together only by the paint on the handle, and are of very inferior design, workmanship, and material.</p>
				<p>When I was a social worker in Milwaukee in the thirties we were often derided by well-to-do Republicans for “coddling the culls” when we helped the poor. From time to time, I have heard radicals who were especially scientific and eugenic-minded look upon the ideals of Jesus and Gandhi as perpetuating the life of the unfit and the misfit. When I helped in the formation of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> House of Hospitality in Milwaukee, in 1937, I will admit that my interest was limited to its pacifist and anarchist slant, and that I felt this coddling of the bums was not so important. After my study of Tolstoy, my acquaintance with Peter Maurin and Dorothy Day, and my ten years as an actual laborer⁠—rather than a radical theorist with a good job⁠—I have come to view this whole matter in a different light. The conversation about grades and purebreds that night, and my meeting with the young rattle-brain who was “for all good causes,” helped me to clarify my ideas along this line.</p>
				<p>In this age of the assembly line, of supermarkets and super-advertising schemes, of radio get-rich-quick guessing games, and of Service Clubs to put a little holy oil of goodness on this theft, the illusion persists that this is a scientific and efficient age. Yes, we produce, but for what? If somehow we do have bums, poor housing, ill-health, new diseases, and poverty, these can only be attended to by Community Funds; Heart, Cancer, and Give-a-Dime campaigns; pensions; and social security payments by the state. Charity Incorporated has no room for Houses of Hospitality, where there is no record of aid given or even the name of the recipients, no “singing for your supper.” “They won’t work if you keep on feeding them!” “They sell the clothing you give them around the corner for booze,” say the well fed parasites who also refuse to work, and do not help the poor except to give away a suit that is too small for their fat bellies, or to give a very dim and distant contribution to a fund, much of which goes for overhead. The idea of these professional do-gooders is to give “coals and treacle” to the poor, as Shaw said, and to keep them out of sight in order that the rich may not be reminded of the filth and degradation which is the foundation of their wealth. And on this matter of clothing being sold for booze, the clothing given to <abbr>St.</abbr> Vincent de Paul, Goodwill Industries, and Salvation Army is many times purchased by stooges of the secondhand stores. All that is left for the really poor is the sorriest stuff. In my work as a social worker, I discovered that no matter how many rules you had to keep from giving relief to frauds, that it did not take a very smart person to scurry in between our red tape and beat us at our own game. Good social workers are told not to “become emotionally involved” with their clients. Again, the mechanistic approach.</p>
				<p>The <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> breaks through all this sham. Instead of living in fine apartments to which we can repair after witnessing the other side of the tracks, we who accept Lady Poverty have given up worldly goods, insurance, and much of our privacy. This cull in the breadline, this drunk or prostitute, this maladjusted and perhaps lazy man⁠—all of these may not be improved a bit by our help⁠—and yet one may be helped now and then. Ours is not a Success Story; the Way of the Cross was also a failure. He at least might have led a rebellion against the Roman State, instead of dying on the Cross and forgiving His enemies.</p>
				<p>Where are we to look for those who are going to bear the Cross today? It is true that <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis, Tolstoy, Malatesta, Kropotkin, and Gandhi left their inheritance and, choosing voluntary poverty, were able to accomplish much. We also print the word and deliver the lecture to purebreds as well as to the culls. We make no mistake in thinking that because a man is ragged, he is holy, for if he is avaricious, he is as much a slave to money as is the rich man. (My banker friend Brophy jokingly told me that he would have to write a defense of the rich for the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. I told him that he would end contradicting himself, and that the best defense for the rich could be obtained by the oratory resulting from a few drinks given to a poor man on the street.) The Old Pioneer tells of stopping at a stand in the desert recently, and being charged 15¢ for a soft drink. “This is 500% profit for you,” he told the proprietor. “I’m not in business for my health,” said this greedy and seedy defender of the capitalist system. And might have added: “For anybody else’s health either.” The Old Pioneer also tells of being charged 25¢ for one common needle, in the old days when everything coming into Phoenix had to be hauled from Maricopa Wells station, beyond South Mountain. “The freight is what costs,” was the alibi of the greedy merchant. How much freight on a needle?</p>
				<p>Neither do we count the purebreds, Tommy Manville, the dear old, <abbr class="initialism">DAR</abbr> ladies, the useless royalty of Europe and the maharajahs of India, our own inbred Du Ponts, and intellectuals who have, nearly without exception, prostituted their talents toward the making of bombs. There is some hope that, among the bums, we may find a John the Baptist to carry on the work when we have gone. There is little hope from politicians whose integrity has already been purchased, or from the super-educated to whom a doctor’s degree, a deep freeze, and a television set mean more than fighting for a lost cause.</p>
				<p>How will we then come to a sensible way of life? Without war work we would have a terrible depression. Hardly a person but will gladly earn this blood money! Hardly a person but will pay taxes for more bombs! The rich will not give up their riches, and the poor will not give up their pensions (for the young will not help the aged, preferring to “keep up with the Joneses”). The froth at the top has little right to scorn the scum at the bottom, meanwhile, we who do the work of the world scorn them both.</p>
				<p>The Old Pioneer remarked recently that Jefferson’s plan of not having great wealth inherited was the right idea. This reminds me of the old Russian proverb one of my Molokon friends told me: “Do not lay up money for your son, for if he is any good he can make his own money, and if he is not any good he will lose it.” So, in our writing, our picketing, our speaking, our help to the poor in Houses of Hospitality, we must show our sincerity by our own voluntary poverty. No one would think of bribing us, for by our lives we have established the fact that we need nothing. We need not fritter away our time by building up “all good causes,” which are not so good, for they accept the tyranny of the state, and operate without questioning its framework. When they are ready for it, the rich, the bourgeois intellectual, the bum, and even the politician and the clergy may have an awakening of conscience because of the uncompromising seeds of Christian Anarchism which we are sowing. To all of these we make our appeal, and from all it is not impossible to gain a few adherents for that time “when each shall give according to his ability and receive according to his need.” For what does all of our bookkeeping mean but a denial of this ideal?</p>
				<p>Johnny Olson came back from a sojourn in Texas. In a splurge of affluence, he bought five mouse traps and set them around our house. He caught the whole population, which consisted of three mice. While I, as a pacifist vegetarian, would not cause the death of Brother mouse, yet, as an anarchist, I have no right to deny Johnny the right to catch them … The old mules belonging to a neighbor, which I have used for plowing the garden these five years, are now muleburger. They did not enter this incarnation legally, for they were not killed in time for the new government regulation which allows equine meat in weiners.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Irrigating</h3>
				<p>Today, May 15th, I received a notice that I owe $2.15 interest and penalty on my $192 tax bill for 1951 and, unless paid within ten days, my property and wages will be attached. This is an old run-around, and I am not worrying. Today, I ate the first Irish potatoes this year from our garden, which is more important in the life of man than paying taxes. The persimmon tree, which the Old Pioneer’s daughter-in-law gave me last winter, now bears premature fruit. Watermelon, eggplant, tomatoes, squash, peppers, and onions are doing fine. I am irrigating tonight, and soon I will be irrigating maize for James. Now, in June, I have been irrigating about three nights a week. Because of the heavy rains, there is plenty of water this year, and it is not rationed. If a farmer does not use up all the water he has ordered or is allowed in one year, he is not permitted to carry it over to the next year, for no one can tell if the next year will be one of drought or not. Various crops need various amounts of water. In this two-crops-a-year valley, melons, lettuce, wheat, and barley require two acre-feet. Cotton takes three to four acre-feet, and the ground has to be really soaked before the cotton seed is planted, or it won’t grow; alfalfa seven to eight acre-feet, and celery the most of all: nine acre-feet. The average amount used by a farmer is four acre-feet. Melons are irrigated with a small flow of water down each row for as long as 24 hours, the idea being that the moisture will gradually sub up to the roots. Thus, not so much water is used as when a whole field of alfalfa is flooded. In this hot country, when most seed is planted and irrigated, another irrigation must soon follow, so that the seed will be sure to start growing. To explain an acre-foot is a very technical matter, but for the layman it is sufficient to know that it is the amount of water that would cover one acre a foot deep. The <i xml:lang="es">zanjero</i> has a measuring device whereby he can tell how much water goes over a board. Thus, 20 inches flowing over a board six feet long for 24 hours is an acre-foot.</p>
				<p>Generally, James uses 150 inches for three days and nights, switching the water from alfalfa to newly plowed ground, or wherever it is needed most. If the ground is very dry, the water may shoot over it in a hurry, and not penetrate to much depth. Then, the next irrigation will use up much more water. The other night three lands ran smoothly in newly plowed land, and required no attention from me. Two other lands were not level, and I had to make checks all along, as the water went to one side of the land entirely. Last night, I did not cut off the water soon enough from the end of the quarter-mile run, and too much of it flowed into the highway. In this field there was no ditch to catch the overflow, the ditch being across the highway, so I hotfooted it to make openings for the water to escape. There is a fine for flooding the highway. I always jeer, in a high-minded way, toward those who let water run into the road, and now I myself am the guilty one. James said he would get the blame for being a poor farmer, for, of 50 people who might pass, only one would know that I was the hired man who was the culprit, but all knew him.</p>
				<p>Field after field is flooded with lights at night, these past few weeks, for the Navajos and Mexicans who tie carrots all night. Some camp in the bushes along the lateral, others come in trucks from town. Little money in this work. As I was walking to a neighboring farm, the other morning, some young Mexicans who knew me pointed and motioned for me to come to the field where they were turning melon vines out of the ditches where they were irrigated. I shook my head and said, “<i lang="es">la otra</i>,” pointing to another job toward which I was headed.</p>
				<p>The out of state person who comes here and wants to raise even a small garden has much to learn. The seed catalogs are not written for this dry climate. And even the good articles, that appear in the papers, do not sink in. One has to learn by bitter experience. These newcomers say it is a dry country, so everything must have plenty of water, and they proceed to pour it on. The sun bakes the ground and cracks it open, and the air gets in to the roots, and the plant dies. <em>Do not pour water on top of the ground.</em> The right way is to make a trench and run the water in this trench beside the plant until it subs up and moistens the roots, the top soil remaining dry. When tomato plants are blooming, lay off the water, for they will not set and form tomatoes, but will grow into tall green bushes with few tomatoes. And after the tomatoes are green, if you water them too much, they will not ripen. Same with watermelon: when the blooms appear, go slow on the water; then, when the melons form, give them the water which makes watermelon. Irish potatoes seldom bloom in this climate. We have been eating them for about a month, but we will have to consume them quickly or give them to friends, for in this dry climate the potatoes will soon wither away. The Old Pioneer and I agree that it is unethical to sell anything from our garden. The work is a labor of love, and not commercial, so the produce should not be commercialized either, so we give away our surplus.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Whittaker Chambers</h3>
				<p>The Old Pioneer and I had read the summary of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Witness</i>, by Whittaker Chambers, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Saturday Evening Post</i>. Any Irishman detests an informer. I had never heard of Chambers in my radical days, except that my wife and I knew Esther Shemitz at the Rand School, in 1920, and later on we heard she had married, but didn’t know it was Chambers. As I read his articles, I recognize the type of sentimental radical who had just enough conscience to not enter fully into Communist trickery for a long stretch of time, and who had just enough knowledge and feeling of religion to use it as a cover for his weakness of character. I have met many tired radicals, and those who have frankly decided that their radicalism was youthful folly, so for the remainder of their lives they would eat, drink, and be merry. I have also met former radicals who have become holy jumpers, Jehovah’s Witnesses, and even Christian Scientists, but in each case they carried their radical sincerity and self-sacrifice into their new belief. I have also met radicals who have gone way over to the other side.</p>
				<p>As I read of the life of the early Quakers, I could not place Chambers into any sincere relationship with them. He did quit the party. That was good. He could still have been a radical after studying Kropotkin and Tolstoy, for a man of his learning could not be ignorant of the anarchist philosophy. If he liked life on the land, he could have made a living on the land, instead of accepting the 30,000 pieces of silver a year from that super apologist of capitalism and war, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Time</i> Magazine. Whether all that he said about Hiss is true or not is not important. The problem is not “How bad is Hiss?” but “How good is this Chambers who talks about God and Freedom, and who, after the travail of body and spirit, must return to his capitalist vomit?” There is no sackcloth and ashes worn by this capitalist farmer and successful writer, who has chosen to prostitute his clever mind to capitalism instead of to Stalin. This baby business about “being on the losing side” does not come well from one who seems to be winning plenty of applause and cash in his new venture, as the poor bashful boy from the wrong side of the tracks who fought the well-dressed and high-and-mighty money changers in the State Department. In this election year, when the slimy policies of our statesmen may be due for a change in direction but not in sliminess, Chambers may well be on the winning side.</p>
				<p>The comment of the Old Pioneer on Chambers was that he was reminded of an old time owner of a saloon and dance hall here in Phoenix, who was quite a drunkard. One night, he was drunk, and went outside and slept off his spree on the pile of horse manure, which was there in the days before automobiles. He was awakened by the scream of a woman and, staggering into the dance hall with the horse manure sprinkled all over him, he shouted: “I come to defend the honor of woman.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Real Issue of 1952</h3>
				<p>This being election year, I thought it well to summarize the anarchist argument against voting, in my leaflet given out during my seven days fast and picketing, <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 6 to 12.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>You as a citizen of the United States and a registered voter are asked to vote for politicians representing certain political parties. Have you ever stopped to think what this voting really means?</p>
					<p>You are told that if you do not vote you are irresponsible. If you do vote then you are indeed irresponsible, for the very act of voting is dodging your responsibility by passing the buck to others. You have no kickback if your elected representative does not live up to his promises. You are told that unless you vote you have no right to beef about the way things turn out. The answer to that one is very simple: when you vote you have no way of knowing that your candidate will win. If he loses, the issues he has endorsed will have failed. If he wins, there is nothing to prevent him from turning his back on these same policies or conveniently forgetting about them. In either case, win or lose, you will have consented by having voted to accept the winning candidate’s judgement as superior to your own. You know, of course, that politics abound with examples of these situations. If you have any lingering doubt of the validity of this just ask yourself who it is that actually selects your candidates for you?</p>
					<p>Now you might agree with me so far but be tempted to say: “But if the good people don’t vote for good candidates the bad men will run the country.” A really good candidate makes an ineffective official because he won’t stoop to the low methods that are essential to the efficient operation of government. Nowhere is this conclusion more eloquently demonstrated than in the autobiography of that famous muckraking journalist of 40 years ago, Lincoln Steffens, whose experience in “cleaning up” many American cities made him an authority.</p>
					<p>If voting is not all that it is cracked up to be, how did we get into this state of affairs? Have things always been this way? You are far too young to remember the days when there were no nation-states as we know them today. Of course you recall from reading the Old Testament that there was a time when there were no rulers in Israel and “each did what was right in his own heart.” The people grumbled and asked for a king. The Prophet told them that a king would take their sons for war and their daughters for concubines and servants, and would pick the choice of flock and field for himself and make slaves of them, but still they wanted a king. They got a king, and from that time on went downhill, ending in the Babylonian captivity.</p>
					<p>Throughout several centuries before the advent of nation states, various kinds of city-states developed in many regions and endured for long periods of time. The democracy we associate with the Greek city-states rested upon a slave economy and extended the blessings of democracy to the slave owners only. In the city-states that flourished during the Middle Ages people had never had it so good. They knew no wars as we know them. Professional soldiers of fortune fought except on Sundays and the numerous holidays on rather well-defined battlefields. Civilian lives and private property were fairly well-respected and conscription and rationing were unheard of. While they did not have our gadgets, they had perhaps a larger degree of security than any people have had before or since except in jails or under slavery. When the guilds had pride in their work, artisans produced fine goods with skill and loving care, and the same spirit made the functioning of these medieval city-states one of the most outstanding examples of decentralized government ever to have existed. The guilds and the city-states fell finally for the same reason that modern craft unionism has become an “old man of the sea” on the back of the labor movement⁠—they refused to help and protect the unskilled worker. That “Cradle of Democracy,” the New England town meeting, is democratic only during that one day of the year that it meets, for the rest of the year delegated authority usurps the real democratic idea.</p>
					<p>The advent of capitalism in England with the invention of the steam engine divorced the worker from the ownership of the tools of production. The Enclosure Acts, which aimed to produce wool for this new system of factory production, resulted in the farmers losing their lands and becoming the pitiful wage slaves described in the novels of Charles Dickens. Capitalism paved the way for the modern nation-state. The nation-state did not acquire its ultimate power until Napoleon introduced military conscription, centralizing and consolidating power in the all-too-familiar pattern of today. This myth that teaches the right of an omnipotent state to lay claim to the allegiance of the bodies and minds of its citizens, and today masquerades under the high-sounding phrase of “Selective Service,” is the backbone of strength of the nation-states of today. Destroy this myth and a tremendous stride will have been taken toward the day when nations will live at peace with each other.</p>
					<p>Prior to capitalism the feudal worker was exploited by his guild-master during the years of his apprenticeship but was given food, clothing, and lodging. When his term was up, his guild master gave him a purse of money, the tools of his craft, and a certificate attesting to his merit. As a journeyman he was free to travel anywhere he wished without being subjected to immigration restrictions or jurisdictional disputes.</p>
					<p>Today most workers do not own the tools of their trade. Yet where these tools consist of industrial processes or the factory system, today’s productivity is many times that of the feudal worker. Today’s worker is paid not in the terms of the worth of his labor or skill but is paid a portion of it called a wage, and the difference which he does not get is called a profit and is taken from him by the owner of the productive process as tribute. Since the worker cannot buy back more than a portion of what he has produced with the wage he is paid the owner is always in danger of stockpiling an unsalable “surplus” (as happened in 1929). This condition holds true even when the nation-state owns or controls the productive processes, as in Fascist Italy, Nazi Germany, or the Soviet Union, not just in countries where capitalism is still more-or-less privately owned. All modern economies answer this problem of the “unprofitable surplus” by directing this portion of their economy’s output into the production of goods earmarked for destruction⁠—tanks, guns, uniforms, battleships, bombers, and the like. Before these implements of warfare became entirely obsolete, “practice” wars are waged, as in Spain and now in Korea, and the hoary alibi of “national defense” perpetually justifies the continued production of these expendable materials⁠—at the expense of the peace of the world. This is done by tacit mutual consent between the various nation-states. And this, briefly, is why neither the United Nations nor any other combination of nation states can possibly end the threat of war. So wars are not accidental⁠—if we didn’t have this war in Korea we would have to have one somewhere else or face the alternative of another depression. Do you remember the sharp stock market slump during the short Korean cease-fire late last year? President Truman was forced to interrupt his Florida vacation and vigorously deny any cease-fire agreement before the stock market recuperated. And as for the truce talks which have lasted for more than a year, do you really believe a truce will result until agreement is reached upon a new battle zone?</p>
					<p>Have you ever considered what kind of a world we would have if men and women of all nations were suddenly to come to their senses and agree upon a scheme of life which left no room for exploitation and war? Our technology today is sufficiently advanced that our forests, mines, mills, and factories can produce commodities far more rapidly than the world can wisely use or consume them. Agriculture, transportation, and communication have also kept pace.</p>
					<p>This is the only valid issue of 1952. And you will pardon me for saying that while the issue is hardly a new one the solution is respectably ancient also. Jesus knew it, and summed it up masterfully in the Sermon on the Mount. Tolstoy, Thoreau, and Gandhi restated it and practiced it successfully. In 1952 it can still be stated that evil begets evil and that only good can overcome evil. And while it is essential that we begin practicing that as a personal code, it is equally essential that we apply it as a people in our corporate acts. An objective analysis of the motivation and actions of the governments of any of the nation-states will reveal to what an enormous extent they return evil for evil. In our own country our national government represents the largest single example of the organized return of evil for evil, both in foreign relations and domestic affairs. Since our national government has truly been created in our own image, it is obvious that the place to begin any reform of government is not by “voting for the good candidates” but by changing our own motivations and actions. As an instance of the satanic ingenuity of this organized evil, our government, in cahoots with the real owners of our economy, has assumed the major share of paying for the “unprofitable surplus” produced by our economy and earmarked for destruction, and has reached into the worker’s wages through the device of the withholding income tax to compel the workers to pay the brunt of this “profit insurance.”</p>
					<p>The withholding tax was scarcely two years old when President Truman secretly ordered the atomic bombing of Hiroshima on <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 6, 1945, just seven years ago this week. Six months previously the Japanese had sued for peace through the offices of General MacArthur. The terms upon which they were prepared to surrender were identical with those we later accepted on <abbr class="initialism">V-J</abbr> Day. The history of the war reveals that during the months following this bid for peace we engaged in the bloodiest battles of the Pacific island fighting, climaxed by the most dastardly action of any war in history⁠—that atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. This act, which earned us the label of being the bloodiest killers of all time, was done in <em>our</em> name, yet we were never consulted on this policy of atomic bombing or even informed of our adoption of it.</p>
					<p>I feel impelled to commemorate this infamous anniversary by picketing the local office of the Bureau of Internal Revenue during these seven days from <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 6 to <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 12. I might add that I have absolutely no stomach for food when I contemplate this monstrous act, so I am abstaining from eating for these days also. Were I only concerned for myself, I would not have prepared this explanation of my picketing. If you are still at a loss to know how best to challenge our government’s iniquity you might do worse than follow my example of refusing to pay income taxes. I have not permitted the government to collect the tax it says I owe for the past nine years.</p>
					<p>I am fully aware that my message may seem too farfetched to have any place in the world of today, and that in self-defense you will wish to dismiss it and write me off as a crackpot. I would almost be inclined to agree with you if it weren’t for the fact that we have, right here in Arizona, a thousand-year-old example of a people already living this good life, having had no need for government election campaigns, courts, prisons, murder, or warfare. I speak of the traditional Hopi Indians who have found the key to living harmoniously together. The major sin they recognize is to try to get even with the neighbor who may have wronged them. Their wholesome culture rests upon each individual’s complete acceptance of responsibility for the consequences of his motivations as well as his actions, and their keen awareness of the spiritual significance of life. In our culture the name given to this way of life consistent with the above mentioned requirements of the better world is Christian Anarchy. You can approximate it today, here and now, without passing the buck (through voting) or waiting for the rest of the world to achieve it. While it rejects voting for politicians or going to war, directly or through subsidizing its cost, it embraces that radical practice known as returning good for evil. Should you wish a free copy of my letter to the Collector of Internal Revenue as reprinted in the <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 1952 issue of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Catholic Worker</i>, ask me for it, or send your request to my mail address.</p>
					<p>Ammon <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Hennacy,<br/><abbr>Rt.</abbr> 3, Box 22, Phoenix, Arizona</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Picketing and fasting <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 6 to 12, 1952</h3>
				<p>Rik’s varityper had broken down, so we had to work all night to get even 80 leaflets for distribution on the first day of my picketing. Byron Bryant, radical friend and recent convert to the Church, was with us that night and he and I attended mass at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s, where I prayed for grace and wisdom to guide me in my seven days fast and picketing. Then I visited my newspaper friends, giving them my leaflet. The <abbr class="initialism">AP</abbr> man was very cordial, and sent out a good story over the state the day before telling of my activity, stressing the fact that I, who was not a church member, went to mass each day to attain that frame of mind necessary for the kind of Gandhian picketing which I engaged in each year, and that, upon the completion of my fast, I would enter a five day silent retreat at Maryfarm near Newburg, <abbr class="postal eoc">N.Y.</abbr> He stressed also, “the 59-year-old Christian anarchist picketing in accordance with the Gandhian principle of open opposition to the state and its war-making functions.” Two local radio stations gave good factual reports of my opposition to taxes and war. As usual, the local press, per instructions from on high, would not dignify themselves by mentioning my name, or that of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Fasting</h3>
				<p>The subject of fasting is difficult for many Americans to understand. I claim to be a One Man Revolution, yet I get ideas from others. I began my fasting in 1950 without reading, in detail, of Gandhi’s opinion on this subject. My experiences in solitary in Atlanta, in 1918⁠–⁠19, had taught me to really love my enemies. Therefore, when I had fasted, I had the most kindly feeling toward tax men and officials. My fasting and picketing was not to discomfort them or trip them up, but to wake up and encourage the timid pacifists and anarchists who did not dare oppose the powers that be. Later I read that Gandhi had nearly died on his first fast of seven days, because he had some mixed feelings of hatred toward the oppressor. On his other fast, of twenty-one days, his mind was clear and he got along fine.</p>
				<p>On Monday night, Rik and I had some chop suey at a restaurant. I was to begin my fast at 4 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> the next day. Accordingly, I had in mind eating a few extras that I could not get out in the country: a malt, grapes, and pie. But in my mind, I had already commenced to fast, and these specials did not taste good, and I did not finish them. I got weighed at 4 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr>, and weighed 140. I lost about two pounds a day. I went home with Rik every night and drank distilled water. After the first day, I was too weak to reach across the table for anything if I had wanted to. I was strong enough when I got in my “picketing harness.” I did not picket on Saturday or Sunday, as the tax office was closed, but I did not rest, as new <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s had arrived, and I was distributing and selling them. Some friends felt I could eat a bite or two for strength on these two days, but I told them that I wouldn’t cheat, and that if I did take a bite, my stomach would growl for more, and I would be worse off than before. Also that my strength came from prayer and ideals and not from food. I got a letter from Dorothy each day, holding up my hands⁠—and feet⁠—as it were. On the morning of the sixth day, I got my second wind, and felt like a new man. I was clearheaded and lightheaded, and walked as if in the air with no fatigue. Each day the <abbr>AP</abbr> wanted some news, so I told them of the weight I had lost. During the last 5½ hours of my fast, I lost four pounds; 17 pounds in all. I broke my fast with a special mixture of vegetable juices, with Rik, at a juice bar. As Rik and I touched glasses in a toast to The Green Revolution, the waitress said: “What good nerves you have; your hand is so steady.” I explained that I was breaking a seven-day fast, and she couldn’t believe it.</p>
				<p>The meaning of fasting, although explained by me personally to many people, could not penetrate to the general public. One woman, who spoke to me about twice a day when she came by, and who argued with me good-naturedly, but not too intelligently, told me, on the last day of my fast, that I could get a good lunch for 35¢ at the <abbr class="initialism">YMCA</abbr>. “But I am fasting these seven days,” I replied. I had given her my leaflet, in which I mentioned my fast, but she had either not read it or did not comprehend it. She backed away from me quietly, and whispered, “You are a saint.” Of course I am not a saint, and I was the same right then as I was before, when she thought I was eating meals regularly.</p>
				<p>On Sunday, I stopped to rest on a chair, in front of the church where I was selling <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s. A lady, who had likely noticed me there for years, wanted to know if I was sick. I told her that I had been fasting for the past five days, and was tired.</p>
				<p>“What are you fasting for?” she asked.</p>
				<p>“Seven years ago they threw the Bomb, and that was a terrible thing to do, wasn’t it?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” she replied.</p>
				<p>“And they are still making materials for them out at Reynolds Aluminum and other places,” I added.</p>
				<p>“Are they?” she queried.</p>
				<p>“Yes. And you don’t suppose that God would pay much attention to prayers for peace from Christians who are making bombs, or throwing them, or helping in the armed services, or paying taxes for all this, do you?”</p>
				<p>“I don’t suppose so, but I never thought of that,” was her reply.</p>
				<p>“Well, I am fasting as a penance for those who are doing all this ignorantly, or who are weak and do it knowingly. I don’t make bombs, or go to war, or pay taxes for war.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, one just man saves the city,” she said reverently.</p>
				<p>“What do you have there?” said a well dressed man to me when I was picketing again.</p>
				<p>“Oh, some good anarchist literature,” I answered rather smartly, for, as I have said many times, I do not believe in minimizing my wares.</p>
				<p>“That’s just what I want. I heard Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman when I went to Yale, and I haven’t met a real anarchist since. Tell me, what are you doing?”</p>
				<p>I explained my anti-tax program in detail. He was a mining engineer from New York City who had properties in Arizona, and in leaving, he gave me a dollar “for the cause.”</p>
				<p>I had no trouble at all with the general public or the police. I had, as usual, notified the police, the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr>, and the tax man that what I was doing was clearly subversive, but not more so than usual. I gave out around 150 leaflets and 50 <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s a day. Many people who had heard reports on the radio, and who happened to have seen an out-of-town paper, stopped and asked for literature. Ed Lahey, of the Chicago <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Daily News</i>, came to see me, but I had left for the day. He left a note. He had written about me previously.</p>
				<p>When I finished my fast and picketing, I started East.</p>
				<p>I drank some more juices on the bus, and ate fruit. The <abbr class="initialism">AP</abbr> had told what I planned to eat on my first meal at my friend, Piatt Cline’s, home. Barbara had mashed potatoes, apple sauce, custard pie, and coffee and toast. Also some peas. This was at 11 <abbr class="time eoc">p.m.</abbr> But at 4 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> I was hungry, and got up and ate some grapes and a peach. On the bus to New York there was little sleep, and not much variety of food for a vegetarian. I had some watermelon with Sharon at midnight, in Chicago, and my mother and younger sister gave me some lunch in a box at Cleveland as they met me at the station. Sunday morning, in New York City, after going to Mass with Dorothy, I got weighed, and it was exactly where it was when I started: 140 pounds.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Maryfarm</h3>
				<p>As we drove past West Point to Newburgh, we shivered, and took new strength in our opposition to this ancient nest of legalized murder. (Selma and I had passed it on the boat in 1921, when we had gone to visit Ruthenberg in Sing Sing.) The bombers were to disturb us all week at Maryfarm, as they buzzed and dived. While fasting, I had been looking forward to the good whole-wheat bread which Dorothy promised me she would bake at the retreat. She taught the girls there to bake, also. There were about forty of us there. Father Casey, who gave the retreat, accepted the Christian Anarchist position of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. We were not supposed to talk to anyone but him, so I got acquainted, and was charmed with his honesty, humor, clear thinking, and courage. One evening, we talked about the evils of capitalism, and I had said that time belonged to God, and not to bankers, and that even 1% interest was wrong. He felt that I might explain some of this to the others, but I told him I had better be quiet, for there was so much that I did not know spiritually. I said I would needle him from the sidelines if he got too far astray from the radical left. The next session he was quoting from the parable of the talents and of the man with one talent hiding it, instead of putting it out to interest. With a smile he said, “Beg your pardon, Ammon.” I took notes on his lectures, asked questions as to church history and dogma, went through all of the masses, compline, rosary, benediction, and singing in Latin without knowing too much about what it all meant. In fact, I got blue marks on my knees from kneeling so much on the hard floor. Toward the last, I had a faint glimpse that there was a green pasture beyond the high, jagged, and thorny theological fence. Whether I would nibble at it or not I did not know, but I continued to pray for grace and wisdom. I had brought along some notes from Tolstoy, Gandhi, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and among them saw this poem by the Protestant Vachel Lindsay, which I had somehow copied with the special one of his I liked, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Leaden-Eyed</i>. In this atmosphere of radical religion, the one radical and the one religious poem fitted. Here they are:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4>The Leaden-Eyed</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Let not young souls be smothered out before</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They do quaint deeds and fully flaunt their pride.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is the world’s one crime its babes grow dull,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its poor are ox-like, limp and leaden-eyed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not that they starve, but starve so dreamlessly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not that they sow, but that they seldom reap,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not that they serve, but have no gods to serve,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not that they die, but that they die like sheep.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4>At Mass</h4>
					<p>
						<span>No doubt to-morrow I will hide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My face from you, my King.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let me rejoice this Sunday noon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And kneel while grey priests sing.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>It is not wisdom to forget.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But since it is my fate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fill thou my soul with hidden wine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make this white hour great.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>My God, my God, this marvelous hour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am your son I know.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Once in a thousand days your voice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has laid temptation low.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>It seems that no one had pulled the weeds from the flower beds for a long time, so I took a busman’s holiday by mowing the lawn and pulling weeds for half a day, in between conferences.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Sacco and Vanzetti</h3>
				<p>I had not known that the Vigil of <abbr>St.</abbr> Bartholomew, Martyr, was on the 23rd of August, the day on which Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti had been done to death by the frightened bourgeois just 25 years before. I mentioned it to Dorothy and Father Casey, and we three, together with Joe Monroe and Kenneth Little, got up at midnight and went to the chapel where, by candle light, we said some of the Matins with special prayers for the souls of these martyrs, in praise for their noble lives and courageous death. We remembered the last words of Vanzetti, who forgave those who were killing him. The retreat was over at noon. Dorothy had phoned to New York City to see where there was a memorial meeting for Sacco and Vanzetti but, in all that city, not an anarchist, <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr>, Socialist, or Communist had a public word to say. They were either gone bourgeois or busy building their respective⁠—and now respectable⁠—organizations. Dorothy said we would have to have our own meeting, then, on Union Square. She had to meet some people at the bus, and Father Casey detoured to say hello to Ed Willock, so Jim, a seminarian, and Roger O’Neil, kid anarchist who gave out men’s clothing at the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, accompanied me to Union Square. Some Christian Front Catholic had the crowd, and was going strong against atheistic Communism. I tried twice, and spoke for about ten minutes each time, but had no soapbox, and a very small crowd. We walked back to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. Father Casey had just arrived, and wanted to know about the meeting. Late as it was, he said we would go up and have a good one, and he would help me by standing and asking me questions. Sure enough, the presence of a priest drew the crowd away from the fascist, and we had a meeting for several hours, until 1:30 in the morning.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Whittaker Chambers Again</h3>
				<p>Several letters came in protesting my denunciation of Whittaker Chambers in the July⁠–⁠<abbr>Aug.</abbr> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. I answered them. Dorothy gave me the penance of reading his book, saying that I was about the one person who was of the age and time of Chambers who had not turned bourgeois, who was still an uncompromising radical, and who had no ulterior motive in asking Chambers to join any group for his salvation. I read the thing, and wrote him the following letter:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>New York City, 223 Chrystie <abbr>St.</abbr><br/><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 9, 1952</p>
					<p>Dear <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chambers:</p>
					<p>I mailed you a leaflet some months ago from Phoenix, Arizona which I distributed on the 300th anniversary of George Fox becoming a Quaker. Later I had an article in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Catholic Worker</i> for July⁠–⁠August in which I made some cutting remarks about your activity as an informer, ending with an illustration uncomplimentary to your character, as spoken by the Old Pioneer with whom I live.</p>
					<p>I had read your articles as given in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Post</i>. Several readers wrote saying that I had been uncharitable and unfair to you. I have read your book and find it much worse than I ever expected it could be. Your talk about God and your being a sacrificial lamb to save this atheistic capitalism from Communist atheism is blasphemy.</p>
					<p>I am happy that you find some peace of mind on the land and that you plan to stay there. I also appreciate that you did hard labor on the streets in Washington <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr>, and that you give theoretical justification to the answer of Johnson to Boswell that courage is the greatest virtue, for without it you cannot practice the other virtues.</p>
					<p>I am coming to Washington within the next month and if it is convenient for you to meet me there or at your farm I would be glad to get acquainted with you on the chance that there “is that of God in you” which may make you evolve from the damning position of choosing the lesser of two evils rather than the ultimate good, which you claim is the true Quaker message and which you refuse to accept.</p>
					<p>Regular bought and paid-for informers, like Budenz, do not deserve the attention of real Christians, Catholic or otherwise. Their mouthing of slogans indicates no prayer or thought. Your case is different for you have not exulted in your informing. It is difficult for any of us to understand ourselves much less other people. However, as you have handed it out by the hundred pages you ought to be able to take it, so here goes.</p>
					<p>First, to introduce myself I will say that my wife, Selma Melms, and I knew your wife at the Rand School in 1920 … [Then I gave my personal radical history, with which the reader is familiar.]</p>
					<p>My attitude toward Communists may be explained by saying that if any of them were arrested in Phoenix where I live I would picket the court at the time of their trial with signs saying:</p>
					<ul>
						<li>“In Russia the enemy of the Worker is the Communist and the Bureaucrat.</li>
						<li>“In this country the enemy of the Worker is the Capitalist and the Bureaucrat.</li>
						<li>“This trial is Stalin’s way; not Jefferson’s.”</li>
					</ul>
					<p>In a frank and sincere spirit I would like you to consider the following questions:</p>
					<ol>
						<li>How can you boast of a Messianic role of martyr, identifying yourself with the early Christians who refused to put even a pinch of incense on the altar to Caesar, or seek to expiate your crime for the sin of being a Communist when with both of your hands you offer your clever mind and the body of your son to Caesar?</li>
						<li>How can you expect the American public to leave their materialism when you offer them only a defense of that materialism against a rival materialism?</li>
						<li>It is true that <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis and Gandhi inched around and retreated before they found the path to sainthood but once they found it they did not blaspheme by calling evil good. You may be weak, and may have sinned, and may not aspire to sainthood, but to hide your weakness and cowardice behind the façade of God and Freedom is sainthood in reverse.</li>
						<li>The Good Thief on the Cross admitted his thievery and asked to meet Christ in Paradise. You continue your wickedness and are unrepentent.</li>
						<li>You do not need to choose the lesser of two evils and uphold war and capitalism. You do not need to forget the plight of those workers who you claim have “humanized my soul for the rest of my life.” You can still choose voluntary poverty, life on the land, and dissociate yourself from both capitalism and communism by accepting Christian Anarchism. Does not the example of Jesus, <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis, George Fox, Tolstoy, and Gandhi mean more to you than the acclaim of the makers of the Atom Bomb?</li>
					</ol>
					<p>Sincerely, Ammon <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Hennacy</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>I did not receive an answer. When I was in Philadelphia, some Quakers said that Chambers was taking instructions with a priest and likely would join the Catholic Church, and that then all of the stoolies would have joined, and the Quakers would not have to be ashamed of his blasphemy.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Catholic Worker</h3>
				<p>I had visited on Mott street for a few minutes in 1938 and 1939, and had spent the day after Easter of 1950 there. Now I was glad to visit the two Catholic Worker farms, stay for two months, and get a knowledge of what the whole thing meant. I was not yet sold on the advisability of majoring in “feeding bums.” I was for more and more propaganda. Dorothy had asked me in the spring to write my Autobiography, so I looked through the files for the last fifteen years and picked out copies of my letters to her and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. Many events had happened, the memory of which was hazy, and some I had entirely forgotten. I took quiet hours in the library at Peter Maurin Farm in outlining this book and in writing the first portion of it. At other times, I explained the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> ideas to visitors, spoke to different radical groups in and around New York, went up to Maryfarm again to speak to a meeting. I met the Shy Apostle, of whom John McKeon had written, and many others who came and went. I had thought that Tom Sullivan would be a grouch, who would dislike my radicalism, as he is neither pacifist nor anarchist. I was delighted to find him a fellow Irishman, whom I loved. I found myself going easy on Mike Harrington, who was a lukewarm Socialist⁠—he got so much razzing from everyone else. I was there for two mailings of the paper, and sat around at different tables getting acquainted. I kidded Betty Lou and Pat, as I had Jane and Helen, at Maryfarm, for being too pious. The bedbugs bothered Joe Monroe and Mike, but I was next bed to them, and they did not touch me. Maybe a vegetarian’s blood is too weak for them⁠—or too strong. I spoke three times at the Friday night meetings, the last time about the Hopi. Tom said this was my best meeting. I told him that was because there was more Hopi, and less Hennacy, in the conversation. Bill Ryan was in the city for a few months, having relinquished his job as editor of the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> paper because of their timidity. I had not seen him since 1942, when he went to prison, so we had many hours of good companionship. Julius Eichel, old time <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr> of both wars, came over with his family to one meeting. I visited twice with Roger Baldwin. We did not argue about our differences, and each respected the other. I was glad to meet the other non-Catholic contributor to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, Fritz Eichenberg, who came to two of my meetings.</p>
				<p>Not enough physical work and too much starch in the diet, I thought, although the fellows in the kitchen always gave me something extra when I took no meat. I had thought I would help Father Duffy in some hard work at Peter Maurin Farm, but with a few rainy days, and my writing and meetings, I didn’t get much done. Quiet Hans and efficient Ed kept things going there. Tamar Hennessy is one of the matter-of-fact practical women, of whom there were very few in this upset world. I played with her children and, off-and-on, had a little conversation with Dave Hennessy. His radicalism stops on “back to the land,” while mine begins there.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Old Catholic Church</h3>
				<p>A letter came from Archbishop Francis, of the Old Catholic Church, inviting me to see him in Woodstock, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr>, beyond Maryfarm fifty miles. I had planned to visit Holley Cantine and Dachine Rainer in nearby Bearsville, so made the two visits at one time. I had corresponded with them for years, and was glad to spend the evening and night there, in their log house and beautiful wooded hills. They are pacifist anarchists, so we had much in common. After getting lost up a mountain, Holley brought me to see Archbishop Francis, whom he knew. This kindly, thin, and agile old man was my match in conversation. Bob had told me I could only be able to get a word in edgewise. But he was not really that bad. He knew many old time radicals whom I had known. I had only vaguely heard of the Old Catholic Church. It started around 1871, when groups in Poland, Holland, and England mostly refused to go along with the infallibility of the Pope. Other leaders had died, until now Archbishop Francis was the head of the group in the world. There are about 70,000 members in this country. As I understood it, these people were not radical, but had meekly followed their leaders, just as many others do. Father Francis was also a vegetarian. His big church in Woodstock was burned during the war⁠—whether by vigilantes or act of God, no one knows. He had moved to the edge of town, on top of a mountain, and built this beautiful small church, decorated with wooden screens, like the Middle Ages, and other wood carvings. He also worked quite a garden. He had signs, and pictures of <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis, warning hunters not to kill anything on his premises, which extended way back. He would ring a bell when hunters approached, and this scared the game away. I attended mass that Sunday morning. It was in English. At the close, he introduced me to his congregation, along with praise for the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. I talked informally to some of them. He had a friend drive us to Maryfarm, where he thought he would meet Dorothy, but she had just left for New York City. As we entered the yard, Father Faley approached to kiss the Bishop’s ring, but he jerked his hand away, saying, “I’m schismatic.”</p>
				<p>I was not attracted to this small denomination because it did not seem to have any life, but I was attracted to the good Archbishop with his simplicity, kindness, and spirit of love. Coming back to town, I visited for half a day with Hugo and Livia Gellert, old time radical friends. They were nonreligous and radicals, but not anarchists. Hugo’s brother had been a <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr> in World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. They knew of my association with the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, and were pleased with my anti-tax campaign. It is good to meet friends, after thirty years, and to feel perfectly at home.</p>
				<p>It was about this time that the “grace and wisdom” for which I had prayed for the past four years, and the prayers of my good Catholic friends, coupled with that Celestial Bulldozer of which I have spoken, made it imperative in my heart that I should become a Catholic. I had written nearly 100 pages of this book before I surprised myself and friends by changing the title of the book to “Catholic” instead of “Christian” Anarchist [the title of the first edition of his autobiography was <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Autobiography of a Catholic Anarchist</i> ―Editor]. In the next chapter, I tell of this in detail.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
