<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 20</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 20</h2>
                                <h3>Joe Hill House</h3>
                                <h3>Salt Lake City, Utah</h3>
				<h3>1961⁠–present</h3>
			</header>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>Time: May 1961 to Present<br />
            Place: Salt Lake City, and West to the Coast</h4>
        <p>After speaking here in April of 1961 at the University I hurried home to New York City to take part in the air raid refusal. 2,000 protested and some were arrested, but few leaders, so I came toward Salt Lake City. Arriving in Cleveland, Ohio to visit my mother and brother and sisters I had a phone call from Mary Lathrop in New York City, saying that she had quit her job and wanted to come with me to Salt Lake City to help start the Joe Hill House. Mary’s father had been a Communist organizer so she knew the radical part of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> message. She had been a Catholic only a short time. She had met my mother while traveling with Dorothy before. We left for Notre Dame where I had several meetings, staying at the home of Terry McKiernan, who has the House of Bread; then to Nauvoo where we saw the grave of Joseph Smith, and I spoke to the Catholic nuns at their school. Mary had been here with Dorothy previously. Then to visit my daughter Carmen in Santa Fe, a week with Phil Burnham in Tucson where I had a meeting at the Allen’s; and a week in Phoenix visiting my many friends. Joe Craigmyle drove us up to the Hopi and back to Flagstaff where we stayed with Platt and Barbara Cline, going to the bottom of the Grand Canyon, before coming to Salt Lake City.</p>
        <p>Here we found work picking cherries, hoeing beets, <abbr>etc.</abbr> I irrigated one night for a Mormon and got odd jobs washing dishes in a restaurant or unloading trucks. Mary got jobs at housework. We visited the town of Layton about 20 miles north trying to get work in the fields, and also talked to the local priest but he was not a bit interested in any work among the migrants. A friend told us that a Catholic student at the University had raised $240 for us to start a House, so we looked around and found this location near the employment office and skid row. A friend in the east gave us $100 to pay the rent ahead. We got two months free rent and paid the two months ahead which brought us up to November First. Meanwhile I slept on the floor here and we looked around for furnishings, carrying bits of lumber from the alleys on our way from Mass early in the morning. Ren Mabey, a seminarian and ex-Mormon whom I had met several years before in <abbr>Mt.</abbr> Angel, Oregon, mopped our floor and gave us a few furnishings. We bought a secondhand small roller-top desk and a rocking chair. When we went to get the money collected for us by the student it turned out that he could not be found, but Mary worked and we were able to make it.</p>
        <p>We had picketed that August 6th until August 21st and fasted because of the atom bomb dropped at Hiroshima 16 years before. In our leaflet, headed in old English <i epub:type="se:name:publication">Thou Shalt Not Kill</i>, we quoted Joseph Smith as saying, “even the Congress of the United States has no power to make a law that would abridge the rights of my religion.” Two young men were sentenced to die at Utah State Prison and their friends asked me to speak at Liberty Park at a protest meeting. The attorney general said that it was against the law to picket the prison, so I wrote to the sheriff and the warden saying that Mary and I had picketed at Sing Sing and we would picket here. The young men got a reprieve the night before the execution and we did not have to picket. The radio and television gave us good coverage and the afternoon daily, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">The Deseret News</i> (Mormon) had a headline: “‘Anarchists’ Picket In City Against Taxes, Killing.” I had met the brother of Ernie Linford, one of the editors of the Morning paper, the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Tribune</i>, owned mostly by the Catholic Kearns family, in Santa Fe, and had looked up <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Linford when I came here. In his column he good naturedly headed it saying “Hennacy’s Coming,” and continued: “You may have lived such a sheltered life that you don’t know this one-man-revolution, but you likely will soon know him by reputation, if not personally.” Then he tells of my radical history and intention to open the Joe Hill House. The police did not interfere with our picketing and we were seldom called “Communist.” One young Catholic who had formerly read the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> in Laramie gave us $15 to get the electricity turned on. We met a sort of Rosicrucian who bought us six cots and mattresses, but when he saw the statues that priests from across the track had given us he didn’t come around any more. One of these priests who was head of the Catholic Youth asked me to write an article for their paper against war and capital punishment and to speak to the youth at Lourdes High School, but a few hours before the meeting he told us that the Bishop did not want anything “controversial” discussed. We had written to the Bishop when we came telling him of our plans and sending him our leaflets and asking for an appointment. After six weeks we received a letter from him saying that he did not approve of our activities. We did not expect him to but we thought we might as well be friends with him. The Catholics have eight churches here and the Mormons have 200 so they want to be overly respectable and conservative, so of course anyone half as radical as we were would be out of bounds.</p>
        </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>Joe Hill</h4>
        <p>Joe Hill, born Hillstrom in Sweden, but as he wrote songs for the <abbr class="initialism"><abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr></abbr> (The Industrial Workers of the World), the radical union of the first quarter of the century, his name came to be Joe Hill. Big Bill Haywood of Salt Lake City had been one of the organizers of this union which sought to help the transient and the poorly-paid laborer. I had belonged to it from 1912 to 1922. The story goes that they were called “Wobs” because a Chinese restaurant owner who fed them for free during a strike in Seattle couldn’t pronounce “<abbr class="initialism"><abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr></abbr>” so as they came in for free eats he would ask them “You Wobble, Wobble?” They would hold meetings on streetcorners and the Salvation Army would sing, so in order to be heard they made up parodies on the Christian hymns. The best known was Joe’s <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">The Preacher and the Slave</i>:</p>
        <blockquote>
        <p><span>Long-haired preachers come out every night,</span>
        <span>Try to tell you what’s wrong and what’s right;</span>
        <span>But when asked ’bout something to eat</span>
        <span>They will answer with voices so sweet:</span></p>
        <h5>Chorus</h5>
        <p><span class="i1">You will eat, bye and bye,</span>
        <span class="i1">In that glorious land above the sky;
        <span class="i1">Work and pray, live on hay,
        <span class="i1">You’ll get pie in the sky when you die.</span></p>
        <p><span>And the starvation army they play,</span>
        <span>And they sing and they clap and they pray.</span>
        <span>Till they get all your coin on the drum,</span>
        <span>Then they tell you when you are on the bum:</span></p>
        <p><span>If you fight hard for children and wife—</span>
        <span>Try to get something good in this life—</span>
        <span>You’re a sinner and bad man they tell,</span>
        <span>When you die you will sure go to hell.</span></p>
        <p><span>Workingmen of all countries unite,</span>
        <span>Side for side we for freedom will fight:</span>
        <span>When the world and its wealth we have gained</span>
        <span>To the grafters we will sing this refrain:</span></p>
        <h5>Last Chorus</h5>
        <span class="i1">You will eat, bye and bye.</span>
        <span class="i1">When you’ve learned how to cook and to fry;</span>
        <span class="i1">Chop some wood, ’twill do you good,</span>
        <span class="i1">And you’ll eat in the sweet bye and bye.</span></p>
        </blockquote>
        <p>The chorus of The Tramp is especially good:</p>
        <blockquote>
        <p><span>Tramp, tramp, tramp, keep on a-tramping</span>
        <span>Nothing doing here for you;</span>
        <span>If I catch you ’round again,</span>
        <span>You will wear the ball and chain,</span>
        <span>Keep on tramping, that’s the best thing you can do.</span></p>
        </blockquote>
        <p>The <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> called for all those who worked in one industry to belong to one union, as in the Brewers Union. In the 1890s when Eugene <abbr class="name">V.</abbr> Debs organized the American Railway Union and everyone who worked for Jim Hill on the Great Northern struck at once they won the strike in a short time. Debs was one of the organizers of the <abbr class="initialism eoc">I.W.W.</abbr> It is said that Father James Hagerty wrote the famous preamble of the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> which begins with these words:</p>
        <blockquote><p>The working class and the employing class have nothing in common&hellip; Between these two classes a struggle must go on until the workers of the world organize as a class, take possession of the earth and the machinery of production, abolish the wage system. Instead of the conservative motto, &ldquo;A fair day’s wage for a fair day’s work,&rdquo; we must inscribe on our banner the revolutionary watchword, &ldquo;Abolish the wage system”&hellip; By organizing industrially we are forming the structure of the new society within the shell of the old.</p></blockquote>
        <p>No wonder when in the winter of 1913 there was a strike of 5,000 miners at nearby Park City where Joe worked, and his revolutionary songs were sung “to fan the flames of discontent,” the wealthy Catholic and Mormon mine owners felt disturbed. Joe had been in jail in the free speech fights in San Diego and San Pedro in California. There the authorities did not allow street meetings. Thousands of the Wobs went to jail, sang Joe’s songs, were beaten and killed, but they won freedom to talk. On the famous May Day in 1912 the “bindle stiffs” burned their lousy bunk houses in the lumber camps and there was a revolutionary urge in the air.</p>
        <p>On the night of January 10, 1914 a former cop by the name of Morrison, who had been attacked twice by robbers in recent months, was killed in his small grocery store at 8th Street and Southwest Temple by two armed men. The older Morrison son was also killed, the only witness being the 13-year-old younger son. One of the robbers was shot. That same night Joe Hill was shot with the same kind of a bullet as that which the Morrison’s shot at the robber. Joe had <abbr>Dr.</abbr> McHugh, former Socialist candidate for Governor, attend to his wound. Later the <abbr>Dr.</abbr> turned in a report of the treatment of Joe, and he was arrested and charged with the killing of the Morrisons. He claimed that he had been shot in an affair over a woman, but gentleman as he was, he refused to name any names. It is thought that the girl was Hilda Erickson in Murray, and that a former suitor of hers, a hanger on of the Wobs, by the name of Otto Applequist, was the one who shot Joe. It least Otto was not to be found the next day. It could be that Hilda tried to take the gun away from Otto, and that Joe was shot in the scuffle. There was no reason for Joe to have robbed the Morrisons. In the preliminary hearing the 13-year-old Morrison boy said it was a shorter man than Joe who did the shooting, but at the trial the boy was frightened into saying “It might have been Joe.” The same tactics were used in the trial of Sacco and Vanzetti. Joe fired his inefficient court appointed lawyers but was finally found guilty. While his appeal was going on under the able Judge Hilton of Denver as counsel, an ex-army man openly killed an <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> leader and was quickly acquitted. Tom Mooney at the <abbr class="initialism">AFL</abbr> convention in San Francisco introduced a motion which was passed unanimously for justice for Joe, and President Wilson asked twice for a reprieve. The school principals of Salt Lake County publicly approved of the Mormon Governor Spry who stood fast against the radicals. The only person of importance here who said that the whole thing was a frame-up was Virginia Snow, the daughter of the President of the Mormon Church, who taught art at the University of Utah and was fired for her courage. Joe was executed at the old Sugar House state prison on <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 19, 1915. He had written the song <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">Rebel Girl</i> while in prison and dedicated it to Elizabeth Gurley Flynn. No friends were allowed to witness the execution. He gave the order to “fire” prematurely, but the guards were not ready. He refused any dope or liquor and stood up like a man. His ashes were distributed in every state but Utah and in many foreign countries. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> McHugh later wrote to the Governor and asked for $500 reward for turning Joe in, but he didn’t get it. In the archives a friend of mine found a letter written from me in 1915 from Columbus, Ohio asking for clemency for Joe Hill.</p>
        <p>Later the song was written <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">I Dreamed Last Night I Saw Joe Hill</i> and it is sung all over the world today. Mary painted a mural of the execution of Joe Hill which in size is 12 by 15 feet and is the prominent feature of our House. As you see Christ is in it as another One who was framed. The <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> wouldn’t print this picture because it had Christ in it and the Catholic papers won’t print it because Joe Hill is in it. Mary also painted a mural of the Holy Family, a picture of a Russian Pilgrim, something resembling a Russian ikon, <abbr>St.</abbr> Joan and the Wicked Bishop, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> We believe we are being true to the memory of Joe Hill by feeding the tramps and transients for whom he cared, and in having no Bible-banging. We do have radical meetings each Friday night.</p>
        <p>At one window we have this quotation from Debs: “While there is a lower class I am in it; while there is a criminal class I am of it; while there is a soul in prison I am not free.” And in the other window this wisdom from John Dewey: “A good man is one, who, no matter how bad he has been is getting better; a bad man is one, who, no matter how good he has been is getting worse.”</p>
        </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>How We Got Started</h4>
        <p>A friend gave us an electric hotplate and we cooked on that. Finally some Ute Indians who were up on trial for chasing an Indian Bureau man off the reservation, stopped in their truck and brought two stoves from a priest across the track. It took us several weeks to get the down payment and the authorization for gas, but finally we could cook on a gas stove. My friend Francis Gorgen stopped in for a visit of a day or two. It seems that again by reverse action we were to be helped, for a priest sent a young Catholic alcoholic to us and he slept here nights. He ate where he worked it seemed, and told us that he had bought us a hot water heater, which was soon delivered. Upon seeing the heater Francis said he would stay over a few days and connect it up. While looking for the connections he bought us a gas refrigerator second hand and connected it and the stoves up also. By this time the folks who had brought the heater came and got it back, for our friend had not paid a cent on it, and was already in jail for some other larceny. I looked around and went to buy a heater from a company second hand. The man, who was a Baptist, said if we were doing good work he wouldn’t take any money for it, so Francis soon had it in working order. I got two laundry tubs second hand but some welding needed to be done before they could be connected. A man came with a portable welder after hours and when he had finished he said, &ldquo;Hell, I wouldn’t charge you anything, for I used to hop freights myself.” Francis finally stayed three weeks and the kitchen was in running order. Later I bought a shower bath for $35 and Francis installed it. Meanwhile our friend was out of jail and was collecting money and cashing checks for more liquor, all in the name of our House. I got the Mormon daily to print a notice that no one was collecting money for us. I went to one paint company and got 2&frac12; gallons of light grey paint; then I told the next company about it and they gave me the same, and another company upped it to four gallons, and our walls were clean. I went to a paper company and had to ask them for new toilet paper, so they gave me a carton of it. Then to three other companies who each give a carton a year. A cracker company brings us crackers, and a few coffee companies have given us coffee. I had written to General Foods telling them that here was the opportunity to have Postum given free instead of coffee, but they had no imagination and answered no. The Hershey man brings us plenty of cocoa. Mary and I carried 120 <abbr>lbs.</abbr> of wheat on our backs for nearly a mile, and it is ground on the old coffee grinder I had in Milwaukee when my girls used to grind their own cereal for breakfast. Nearly all the bread companies said if they gave to one they would have to give to all. I told them to break down once and see how it felt. Finally one baker allowed me to get two baskets of bread three times a week, and another hearing about it allowed us two baskets once a week. The Spudnut folks gave us doughnuts twice a week and likewise a pie company. But milk and egg folks wouldn’t budge.</p>
        <p>Mary and I went around to the merchants saying, “We are pacifists, anarchists, subversives, and Catholics too radical for our Bishop, but we need sugar, <abbr>etc.</abbr>” We got it. Readers of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> over the country who know me send bits of money at times, so I make it alright. $100 a month is enough. I know that if I do the best the best will be done by me. Few Catholics in town help us but in time they will get over their fear. Mary had been in California working among the migrants in the fields around Tracy and Stockton, and painting murals for the Mexicans and the Quakers. Now in San Francisco she wrote in the January 1963 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>: “I was down in the kitchen of <abbr>St.</abbr> Anthony’s Dining Room when the Archbishop was dishing out meals to the men, and I wrote to Ammon that someday perhaps Bishop Federal will go down to Postoffice Place and do the same thing for him.  Stranger things have happened.” And although one of the leading priests advised us that, “It is more meritorious to obey a stupid and mistaken priest than it is to obey your conscience, for that may be self will,” and although he stands for capital punishment and war, it also it not impossible that such men may change. Cardinal Suhard, an old man in Paris, saw that the workers were not going to Church and he started the Worker Priests.</p>
        </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>Public Relations</h4>
        <p>The Mormon radio, <abbr class="initialism">KSL</abbr>, interviewed me here at the House, asking me what our rules were. I said “no liquor and no cops.” Coy Ringo was doing life for murder and had escaped from the state prison, stabbing a guard. I was asked if I would hide an escaped murderer. I replied that “I sure as hell would. In the Middle Ages anyone whom the law was after could find sanctuary in a Church. Now the Mormons and the Catholics see which one can shoot them first.” This was released twice on the radio and I had several elderly Mormons come in and ask if I was the man that would protect criminals. In asking the merchants for food, one of them wanted me to get a clearing from the Chamber of Commerce. I went there and explained our ideas and was asked what my racket was. I told them that Mary and I would not sit out on the cold curb early in the morning waiting for some padrone to pick us up if we had any racket. Nor would we spend 14 hours going to and fro to a job and working picking cherries and then get a rubber check for our trouble if we had a racket. I said that the Salvation Army only allowed transients to stay there one night a month, and if they didn’t have a social security card they would turn them in to the police. That the cops had police dogs after the men in the alleys at night, so where the state left off it was the place for anarchists like us to begin.</p>
        <p>The health department came around and said that it was unsanitary to sleep men on the floor. I said where were they going to sleep the men. They said I should have double bunks with mattresses. My reply was that the men would fall out of the bunks and crack their skulls, and besides I could only have room for a very few such bunks while I could sleep 70 on the floor. But it was still unsanitary they said. I told them that there must have been some regulation from folks like them that Christ shouldn’t have been born in a stable.</p>
        <p>The police came in and wanted to know the name of some man. I told them that I didn’t ask any questions. They said that by law I ought to take the names of all who came. My reply was that inasmuch as I did not charge anything I did not have to take names. It was not long until the police brought men in late at night, or even in the daytime, for us to sober up in our “cooler” under the stairway. They are friendly now as we take a lot of grief off of them.</p>
        <p>Four times the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr> came in looking for someone. I shut my eyes and told them that I couldn’t see, and if anyone whom they wanted was in here I wouldn’t tell them anyway; that besides I didn’t like that stinker <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Edgar Hoover. Later they took our literature and do not bother us. A man from the Fire Department came in and said that this place was a fire hazard. I told them that I slept on the floor by the door at night and was up most of the night so that if there was any fire I would know it, and that we took matches away from any drunks we kept in the cooler. He looked around and said, “Well, I guess 60 men in 60 doorways are more of a fire hazard than 60 men all in one room here.”</p>
        <p>Several people from the Federal Building where we had picketed came over and gave us $5, refusing to give their names, but saying they liked the work we were doing. The Mormon afternoon paper generally prints a small item each week telling of the subject of our Friday night meeting. I spoke several times at the university, and at a luncheon at the Presbyterian Westminster College. Hundreds of students, mostly Mormons, have come down from the university to interview me about our House and to report back to class, and as a result students often come to our Friday night meetings.</p>
        <p>Elizabeth Gurley Flynn gave us a framed picture by Art Young from the old <i epub:type="se:name:publication">Masses</i> of a reward wanted for Christ, the vagabond, “wanted for sedition, Criminal Anarchy, Vagrancy, and Conspiring to Overthrow the Established Government. Dresses poorly, said to be a carpenter by trade, ill-nourished, has visionary ideas, associates with common working people, the unemployed, and bums. Alien—believed to be a Jew. Alias ‘Prince of Peace. Son of Man-Light of the World,’ and Professional Agitator, Red Beard, marks on hands and feet the result of injuries inflicted by an angry mob led by respectable citizens and legal authorities.”</p>
        </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>Picketing for Garcia and Rivenburgh</h4>
        <p>These young men had been raised in reform school, and Garcia had at the age of 16 been put in the state prison among old tough prisoners. He was held and forcibly raped by a score of men. Later in trouble among homosexuals one man was killed. Three were charged with the murder. One got life, and Jesse Garcia and Mack Rivenburgh were sentenced to death. In March of 1962 they were again sentenced to die on the 13th. I wrote a leaflet entitled <i epub:type="se:name:publication">Thou Shalt Not Kill</i> and picketed the Governor and Board of Pardons daily for 12 days. The night before the execution they got a reprieve. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> McNamara, a Catholic Sociologist from New York City, lectured at the University against capital punishment for a week in January, mentioning these cases and Garcia’s married sister and myself, and <abr>Mrs.</abbr> Ethel Hale distributed these leaflets after the evening lectures at the University. One young woman, after taking a leaflet, came back up the steps and asked if I were <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy. I admitted it. She said she was the warden’s secretary, and that they read the literature I had sent them.</p>
        <p>It is reported that an Eastern Catholic Governor appointed 25 people on a commission to report back to him on the subject of capital punishment and that 20 of these were of other religions than Catholic, and five were Catholic priests. When the problem was decided by this committee, 20 were against capital punishment and of course the five who were for it were the five priests. I wrote to every minister in the City telling them that unless they took a stand against these executions that their hands would be bloody. The Catholic Chaplain at the prison spoke to me on the phone and was sorry about the pending executions but would not say anything about it openly, and of course the Catholic Bishop ran true to his conservative form in only being interested in the quiet of the bank and of the grave: nothing to disturb the collecting of money. The only one of the clergy who replied was the Unitarian minister who wrote openly in the newspaper, as I did also, against capital punishment, and who spoke against the executions in the pulpit. He said that the time had not yet come to picket, but at the time of the executions he would stand with me at the prison gate at dawn in silent protest.</p>
        <p>A young, self-centered egoist who was writing a book about Joe Hill came and lived here from the middle of November 1961 for ten months, picketed with me for about ten days, and an employee of the Utah Historical Society picketed also until the heat got too much concerning his job. I do not blame him, but was glad to have his help. The television and radio reported my opinions fairly, and the Mormon daily took our pictures. It was quite a walk uphill to the Capitol on an empty stomach as I picketed the hour at noon, so finally I rode on the bus, and walked home downhill. Beautiful blonde Molly Fisher, whose folks had been missionaries in South America, had heard of our House and picketed with me for two weeks while waiting in the City for a friend. As always in my picketing after a time I got my second wind and for as much as 11 days I did not lose a pound. I continued with my regular work getting the food and sleeping on the floor by the door nights. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Mildred McAlister, a Quaker woman, head of the local chapter against capital punishment, and Professor Paul Vernier of the University, who had been visiting Garcia for years, spoke at hearings before the Pardon Board. I could not get out to the prison those nights because I was needed here to keep peace among the drunks who happened to be especially troublesome just then. Finally, the night before the execution, on September 13th, Garcia got life, but Rivenburgh, discouraged at this 6th time he was facing the firing squad, took poison in his cell. These young men were both Catholics, but no priest was present at Rivenburgh’s funeral in the cemetery where the young Unitarian minister officiated. I was present and was ashamed of this callousness which placed Catholic dogma and cowardice ahead of humanity.</p>
        <p>Several times when coming back from picketing, Molly and I gave our leaflets to the young <abbr class="initialism">LDS</abbr> missionaries assembled for an outing as we passed by. Before the scheduled execution in March, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hale and about 20 others held a protest meeting on the Capitol steps on a snowy night. The radio gave us publicity, but some Jack Mormon rowdies tried to break the meeting up, without success. The letters in the papers during these days were mostly by Mormons who, because of their dogma of blood atonement, believed in capital punishment. I found this also in my picketing. The Saturday before the scheduled execution in September, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hale and an elderly Italian from Magna, Utah, participated in a poster walk with me on Main Street at noon. Others promised to walk with us but in this conservative environment it is difficult to get people to come out and be different. Poulson’s case was carried up in the courts, and he lost his appeal. He never should have been let out of a mental institution, but he was paroled to his mother. He might as well have been paroled to a chair for he had a continual record of sex offenses. He went to the police in Provo and said that he was going to get in trouble again and they had better lock him up, but the police said he hadn’t done anything yet. The next day he killed a babysitter. As in the case of Garcia and Rivenburgh this young man was a product of reform schools and state institutions. Whatever guilt there is lies with the state as much as with the individual. The Supreme Court denied his appeal, so I may be picketing and fasting for him.</p>
        </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>Who Comes to Us?</h4>
        <p>About a third are Jack Mormons, a third Irish Catholics, and a third Oakies or Arkies from the South, with a sprinkling of Negroes, Mexicans, and Indians. About 25 town bums come and go. Many of them get kick-backs from their landlords from rent that the relief pays for them; and also they sell their meal tickets for half price back to the restaurant and have money for booze. In their prosperity, they pay double price to bootleggers on Sunday and holidays when the state liquor stores are closed. Only beer is sold in taverns, and no taverns are on the main street in down town Salt Lake City. You have to have a dollar permit to buy from the state liquor store. Several men know about my ideas on drinking and have given me their liquor permit cards to tear up. Drinking is not the cause of crime or of discord; it is an <em>effect</em> of a discordant and frustrated life. Overprotection by the mother in the home, the fears taught by religion, too much of the rod, and a general sense of the futility of living are causes which drive people to drink or dope to get away from their troubles. When a person desires to sober up, the <abbr class="initialism">AA</abbr> is a great help, but the people I see here do not want to sober up: what they want is one more jug. Preaching to them does not do any good. As I have said before the only way to cure drunkards who do not want to be cured is to put them on some island or far away mountain where a saloon is too far away for them to get at. Then have work for them to do and no one making a profit from their labor. Let them have chicken for dinner every day if they want it; strawberries and cream, or whatever they can raise. Let the place be supervised by one who does not drink himself, and who will pour out any moonshine made from sugar, raisins, <abbr>etc.</abbr> locally. In most institutions the bosses get cream, butter, steaks, while the men get skim milk, oleo, and hot dogs. Let all eat the same food. There is Antelope Island in Great Salt Lake. Men cannot be rehabilitated when there is a tavern on every corner.</p>
        <p>“Eli Begay, sober,” said a young Navajo at midnight. I let him in. Another time he came with an Indian friend, saying, “Eli Begay, drunk. Let my friend in for he is sober. I go away.” Indians do not have much sense of time and while I will turn away a town bum after ten o’clock, I have more patience with Indians. If I am not sure if the man is a transient or a town bum I will give him the benefit of the doubt. By the time I am awakened, up a dozen times a night, every night, I seek to minimize this grief. Many town bums have learned to come by nine <abbr class="initialism">p.m.</abbr> and they can be in the cooler and sober up. I repeat that there is a difference between kindness and weakness. If I find a bottle on them at night I pour it out and put them out. I announce this policy each night before bedtime.</p>
        <p>Cooks who come here and help me say that all cooks are drunks, and in fact I have not found a sober one. On our first Thanksgiving Day in my innocence I thought that the cook was preparing the meal: a turkey given us by a woman who worked at the Post Office, with trimmings. But he was in the back room, passed out. Alba Ryan, an old friend who had been a nurse with the Loyalists in Spain, had stopped for a day or two and took over and we had enough for all. Alba is a fine woman but sentimentally she said, “No one is boss around here; we are all one big family.” I spoke up and said, “I am boss, though not a very eflicient one or I wouldn’t let the cook get by with his boozing. There has to be someone here to see that this place doesn’t deteriorate into a dirty box car.” This cook had told Mary that he wanted to be a Catholic and went to Mass once with her, and then tried to burn her for money to get drunk on. Other cooks sold whatever they could get for liquor. One fat fraud collected about $25 for my birthday, baked a cake, gave me a new typewriter ribbon, and next day went on a drunk with the remainder. I have had scores of men help out with washing the dishes, peeling potatoes, scrubbing the floor, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> They get a job for a day and get drunk and move on. If they come back sober and they are needed I take them on again. In the beginning I used to buy them packaged cigarettes, but I quit that for I found that they always had enough money for booze, so they could buy their own cigarettes too. For the last eight months I have an aged cook whose friends buy him liquor. He is responsible, keeping the ice box and his room where sugar, canned goods, <abbr>etc.</abbr> are stored, locked. Often men get a day’s work and buy some meat, eggs, cofiee, and treat the men who work here and eat with them. Several sentimental people have thought that everyone on the line should get this extra food. There is not enough to go around. These men who do the work get a cot to sleep on. If they can get a little work on the side that is fine.</p>
        <p>Often a Jack Mormon will give me a dollar as sort of a tithe, for he would not dare go back to his Church for they would want him to quit smoking and drinking. Men who get a steady job can sleep here and we give them sandwiches until they can get a payday. Scores have said that when they get paid they will help us, and they mean it, but between their payday and us there is the tavern and they are soon broke again. Many men have been around here for months, helping us at times, and have told tall tales about their former prosperity, and of leads they have for wonderful jobs now, but it is nearly all romancing. Men have worked for days for padrones who cheat them, mainly at cleaning bricks, at $7 a thousand. They may give them a dollar now and then for lunch and then they go bankrupt or disappear. Or they leave the employment office nearby with the promise of a job which terminates five miles from town with 50 cents an hour, or the promise of a payday tomorrow. These cheating employers think that the “bums” will work for very little because they are poor, or they will not bother to stay in town and will leave, and therefore will not have to be paid.</p>
        </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>At Night</h4>
        <p>The sign on the door says that 9 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> is bedtime. This is meant to keep the town drunks away after that hour, but any transient is welcome any time. As Indians do not have much sense of time I let them in unless they are too drunk to stand up. We have a “cooler,” a place under a stairway where we keep garbage and can accommodate five white drunks or six Indians, for the latter curl up like kittens and take little space. The cops often bring men in to sober up whom they are tired of pinching. Often two men will bring a comrade in who has passed out and have him sleep it off here. Two men kept me up all night with the shakes, but I guess it was worse on them than it was on the rest of us. Around midnight I wouldn’t allow a drunken Navajo inside and in a minute he had thrown a vodka bottle through the window, and I was combing glass out of my hair for a week. All Indians stayed away for two weeks, thinking I might turn some of them in for the damage. At times I get up half asleep when there is a knock on the door and I am not sure if the man there is a stranger or a town drunk. I give them the benefit of the doubt. Sixty men sleeping on the floor without anyone snoring! It has happened a couple of times, but generally I have to get up and turn a man over several times on this account. And sometimes a drunk will escape our eyes and commence to babble in his sleep, and then he will have to go to the cooler. At times one of these drunks will urinate wherever he happens to stand, and one morning I got up to turn on the light and stepped in a mess that “Five by five,” an enormous Mexican, had deposited on the floor. Of course he said that he was innocent but the evidence was all over him. While on the subject, one afternoon I was resting in the cook’s room when the phone rang and I got up to answer it. I noticed a stream of water flowing from a corner by the bedroom door. It couldn’t have come from the bathroom. Two drunks had slipped in and were sleeping on two nearby beds. I woke them up and asked which one had urinated in that especial corner. Each said that he was innocent, and one of them noticed the <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis and the Wolf medal that I was wearing and asked what that was. I told him not to change the subject, that the subject was piss, and not holy medals. Coming back from Mass one morning I found that the yardmaster at the freight yard had brought five men up in his car for breakfast, saying that it was better to have them here than to pinch them.</p>
        </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>Social Work?</h4>
        <p>Both Catholic and other religions have wondered if I have been able to rehabilitate the derelicts who come here. These men have had enough preaching. They know better than anyone else what is the matter. They only feel sorry when they get out of jail or when they have a headache. Several men have given me their liquor permits to tear up, but this was only temporary, for in a few weeks they were drunk again. They have a quiet place to read, or if they are sleepy they can go in the cooler and sleep. I would not have a radio or television with all the noise. Several men have come here broke and have sobered up, got a job, and settled down to a good job and a married life. They have come back and told me about it. There may be others. I set them the example of being sober and willing to do any of the tedious or disagreeable work around here. They know I go to Mass daily and that I say prayers for all of them. Prying into their lives does not do any good. When they want any help from me or the <abbr class="initialism">AA</abbr> they will ask for it. I have faith enough in what I am doing to take the long view and do not have to build up my morale by having them sign on the dotted line that they have been “saved.” That is up to God.</p>
        </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>The Daily Routine</h4>
        <p>I get up at 5 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr>, turn the lights on, roll up my blankets, put jelly between two slices of bread, while the cook makes cocoa, and two others get the chalrs and tables ready. Often someone offers to sweep the sidewalk but if not, I do it. Then I read the morning paper or write letters until time to go to 6:30 Mass. Back at 7:30 and have breakfast if I am not fasting. The first mail comes at 8:00, and by 8:45 I am on my way with the rubber-tired cart from the supermarket for fruit and vegetables which they have saved for us, at two stores about a mile away. Often one of the men goes with me and we are back by 10:00 with potatoes, carrots, apples, onions, lettuce, and even avacados and strawberries and melons at times. One place gives us dented cans or cans with the labels off. On Mondays and Thursdays, I go to another store, coming through the Temple grounds where the guards greet me kindly. Monday morning I go for candy to a wholesale house; and for salt, sugar, spices to other places when needed. At 3:30 three times a week I walk 18 blocks (long Mormon blocks like between the Avenues in New York City) for bread, and twice a week I walk 35 blocks for spudnuts and pies. I ride home on the bus. Folks ask me why I don’t get a car or have some of my help get these things. They do not understand that the tax man would get the car, and that most of my help would peddle the bread or pies and doughnuts for booze before they got home. If I have time in the afternoon, I try and sleep or rest for a few hours but often drunks are making too much noise. During the day and before 9:00 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> visitors or students often come in to ask questions. On Friday night I always speak on some radical subject, with a notice being generally printed in the Mormon <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Deseret News</i>. Students come to the meetings often. Afterwards we serve cocoa and cookies. This is a 24-hour-a-day job. Once I went away to Colorado speaking and the drunks had nearly taken over by the time I got back. Folks have suggested that I get a bigger place, but this is enough.</p>
        </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>A Parable</h4>
        <p>One Sunday while listening to the Buddhist sermon in Japanese, I had the following thought and wrote it out afterwards as a Parable:</p>
        <blockquote><p>A man built a house on the upper side of a road, “to be a friend to man,” as he had spent many years traveling over the country and desired to rest a bit. The storms came and the winds blew and the fire poured down from above, and he saw the floods and debris going by where the road had been. He held out a lifeline secured at one end to a huge rock at the side of his house, and upon part of which the house was built. The name of the house and of the rock was called “Independence.”</p>
        <p>Most of the people went by on bits of raft or old tress, saying that they were going to the “promised land,” for if they grabbed the lifeline they would get wet, and would have to struggle and might get drowned, while this way they could go half-merrily along. The man shouted that there were rapids below where they would surely get wrecked, but most of them laughed in a crazy manner, meanwhile drinking from a bottle labeled “social security,” and they smoked from a pipe labeled “peace.” One or two were not drinking from the bottle or smoking from the pipe and they looked up and grabbed the line and manfully struggled to this oasis.</p></blockquote>
        </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>Panhandling</h4>
        <p>Currently there is a campaign on by the police against panhandlers. They have ceased bothering me for they know I feed them here. My friend Ren Mabey had a letter in the morning paper saying that Buddha and <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis were beggars; that if the fact that they spend their donations for liquor was the excuse for not giving them anything, then the police should go after the liquor traffic, but this is a source of profit to the state and at times a source of graft for the cops. I don’t believe in putting men in jail for panhandling. My solution is not to give them anything except to take them to a restaurant for the coffee or food they ask for, and nine cases out of ten they don’t go, for what they want is a jug. Men getting over a drunk have really not eaten for five days and then I will give them half a dozen bowls of soup if they want it. Then there is an elderly packrat who would carry a ton of junk from garbage cans into our place and hide it here and there if we would allow it. Stuff that is already spoiled, and old clothes with holes in them. Fellows tell me that he has shown them his bank book and that he gets a pension. He does not eat here but cooks food in the tourist park.</p>
        <p>If I paid a man $200 a week to run this place, it is not likely that he would stay the second week, for he would not put up with the grief that is a part of a flop-house on skid-row. (My old wob friend Guy Askew says the proper term is skid-road.) Some Gypsies live two doors away and their youngsters called a colored man who ate here “nigger,” so he pushed a Gypsy man through our window in a fight, only it wasn’t the right Gypsy. The landlord has insurance so it was fixed. One drunk slammed the door in anger because I wouldn’t allow him to lie around drunk in the front room, but told him to go to the cooler and sober up. It was on Valentines Day I remember. Then we didn’t have a pay phone, and the minute it happened Mary phoned from California asking how things were. I told her the nice sign she had painted on the door was lost midst the thousand pieces of glass on the floor. Another big bellowing bull of a drunk put his foot in the door and dared any or all of us to make him get away. He said that I was making a fortune out of feeding bums lousy soup, that he could beat the hell out of me, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> After half an hour he cooled off and went away and at 10 o’clock that night asked if he could sleep on the floor. There is no use in arguing with a drunk: you only hear wine talking, not the man. I bought eight bath towels and it wasn’t long until the only one left is the one I have for myself. I bought paper towels for the men to use but instead of putting them in a box for used towels they clogged up the toilet. I couldn’t talk the towel company into giving us a roller towel service free so I pay $3.09 a week: one of the few flop houses with such service I expect. Even then the men cut part of the towel off of the roller. They finally got the idea that the company would not bring me any more towels if they continued.</p>
        <p>Men get off the freights four miles away and it is often late by the time they get here. Salt Lake City is surrounded by desert for 500 miles every way you go, so men who ride the freights are tired and hungry and need a place to rest. They are welcome here any hour of the day or night. Several times young couples came along on scooters, broke, and I allowed them to stay in the cooler a night or two, and in flush moments I have paid for a woman to stay in the cheap hotel upstairs. The Jewish Social Service, Lutherans, Unitarians, and Catholics send men here at all hours. At midnight, a woman three miles away phoned saying that a drunk man was sleeping in her house. He had done painting for her that day and had not sobered up yet. She was a widow and her priest said to call the cops to get him out, but she didn’t like to do that, so the priest said to call me. She sent him here in a taxi. He was hardly able to walk but with my help made it to the cooler. An enormous man sat on the floor and dared us to put him out. It would have taken half a dozen men and most of the windows would have been broken, so we had to do as Peter Maurin says: <em>to put up with each other the way God puts up with us.</em> I wouldn’t mind an adult pacifist to help me at times, or free.</p>
        <p>Pious frauds come around and want to make our place into some racket of collecting clothing and selling it; or collecting money house to house. One such fellow had been to many monasteries he said. He wore scapulars all over his coat and offered to go right out and collect money for our place. I told him to get out and stay out. Another bewhiskered “Messiah” was flashing money in the tavern and was robbed and raised a fuss about it. He made the excuse that Christ associated with winebibbers, but I told him that Christ didn’t flash any money but went “without script or purse.” Then a whisky-faced lout came in from Chicago wanting to know if “Big Brother” had been here yet to start a mission and make “big money selling jewelry.” Maybe I could get in on it if he recommended me. I chased him too.</p>
        <p>Catholics have told me that I am “earning merit” if I do this for Christ’s sake, but that otherwise it is all wasted time. Some radicals tell me that I ought to be “making the revolution” instead of patching up the system and coddling bums. The religious want me to bookkeep my good deeds like a Boy Scout. I tell them that of course I see somewhat of Christ in every man but I joined the Catholic Church for the Sacraments and for my appreciation of Christ and many fine saints, but I didn’t have time to bookkeep “indulgences” and that my prayers at Mass were direct to Christ and not to any mediaries. I tell the radicals that the Joe Hill House is a base where I can with honor picket military bases nearby, picket against the execution of prisoners, hold forth to students who are curious about radicalism, and have a meeting very Friday night where no Board of Directors can tell me “not to be so radical or you’ll slow up money coming in.” I am a free man in a slave-minded society.</p>
        </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>Mary Lathrop</h4>
        <p>I have mentioned Mary and her help with my picketing in New York City and our coming to Salt Lake City. There was some criticism from the Catholic clergy about our radical message. I did not seem able to write anything about it that suited Mary or myself so we agreed not to mention the subject in my book. However this fall Dorothy Day’s book, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Loaves and Fishes</i>, was published by Harper and Row. And in it is a chapter entitled &ldquo;Picture of a Prophet.&rdquo; The last six pages discuss Mary and me. It is done with such a good spirit and is so fair, and is so much better than either Mary or I could do that I am repeating it here, with special permission from the publishers.</p>
        <blockquote>
         <p>He liked women, too—especially young and pretty women—and greeted them all with a swift embrace when he met them. &ldquo;I never remember the time I was not in love with some woman,&rdquo; he declared happily on the evening of his sixty-eighth birthday. Another time he said seriously, &ldquo;There is only one woman I ever really loved and this is my wife.&rdquo; I suppose it was some aspect of his wife that he saw in all women&hellip;</p>
         <p>This marriage had been a common-law one, and I think he always felt free to marry again, although he spoke of his anarchism as an obstacle. He did not believe in getting permission to marry from the state by applying for a license. Anyway, until last year the matter never came up. Up to that that time Ammon always had three or four good women friends who were truly devoted to him, even though he often spoke of women scornfully, insisting that they held men back in their radical careers.</p>
         <p>Then, a year and a half ago, Mary Lathrop erupted into his&mdash;and our—life. She is a lively young woman who looks eighteen rather than twenty-eight, slim, beautifully built, with the strong legs of a dancer. She had worked for almost a year in a burlesque show. &ldquo;&hellip;I guess I did it to shock my New England family, to get even with them, and also to get enough money to pay my psychiatrist&hellip;&rdquo;</p>
         <p>Soon after Mary’s arrival, Ammon got out of Sandstone prison&hellip; (after arrests on the air raid demonstration). Ammon announced that he was going to picket all night along Greenwich Avenue, which fronts the jail. Mary said she would picket with him—and she did. She was always ready for an adventure.</p>
         <p>She was getting rid of some of her driving energy, too. Ammon recognized that energy in her at once, and he loved it. Soon he began to talk of her as a wild young colt who needed to be hitched to a plow. He’d tame her, he seemed to imply. Certainly he began to work her hard. He was up every morning for seven o’clock Mass at old <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s Chiirch on Mott Street. If Mary did not show up, he took to going to her apartment door (she shared two rooms with Judith and me) and waiting until she came out. They went for the mail together, and he kept her at the typewriter until every letter was answered. Around eleven each day they sold the paper on the streets and then went on to picket he Civil Defense headquarters or the Atomic Energy Commission. They would be back in the office for supper, perhaps, and out to more meetings in the evening. It was the kind of life that appealed to Mary.</p>
         <p>&ldquo;I like to be with Ammon,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;because I love to show off and so does he. I was brought up to show off,&rdquo; she added a little bitterly. She came from a broken home and spoke sadly of having two mothers and two fathers. She felt injured and aggrieved, but one could tell how much she loved her mother and father and how much she missed them. She turned to Ammon as to another father; she liked to cling to him. She was demonstrative, as was he; and he satisfied her need to show tenderness.</p>
         <p>Sometimes she rebelled against his routine and morning after morning would take off to the flower market, where she begged armloads of flowers, with which she decorated statues, tables, and desks. We were in the loft on Spring Street when she first came to us. If she felt like running from end to end of the place, letting out Indian war whoops, she did it. (The loft was 180 feet long, so she had scope for her talents!) At other times she threw herself into skits or parodies with such verve and humor that we laughed until the tears came. Her imitation of Captain Ahab in <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Moby Dick</i> and of a Southern senator were equally funny. But she could be as gentle and appealing as she was outrageous and boisterous. She has a lovely voice and often sings folk songs. Once, when we were driving somewhere together, I started reciting the ‘Veni Creator Spiritus.’ She began to weep. She wanted to join a convent immediately.</p>
         <p>She used to paint pictures on the walls, on pieces of board she picked up on the street, on the head and footboard of an old bed she had rescued from a gutter. Her side of the room in our apartment was one grand clutter of murals, pictures, paints, paper, paint brushes, books, and clothes. Mary loved clothes. As fast as they came in to be donated to the poor, she dipped into them for a change of her own costume.</p>
         <p>Ammon, like most men, preferred her in frilly things, her hair waved, face made up, and so on. He liked frivolity in women—but Mary rebelled at that, too, although half the time she fell in with his wishes. When she dressed as she pleased, she came either in rags or in some dramatic costume that set off her rather austere beauty. On the latter occasions she would put on a cultivated New England accent and the manner of the exclusive girls’ school. I am sure that this charmed the Midwestern and Will Rogers type of person Ammon was. He liked to show her off to his friends. &ldquo;She’s going out with me to Salt Lake City,&rdquo; he boasted. The boast became &ldquo;And she wants to marry me.&rdquo; Not that he wanted to marry <em>her</em>; Mary wanted to marry him, he insisted. When Mary heard him say this, she would announce that what she really wanted was to go into a convent.</p>
         <p>&ldquo;But what convent will harbor that wild creature?&rdquo; everyone around the office asked. &ldquo;She frightens young men; convents are too conventional,&rdquo; an old friend of the family observed. So all agreed “she might as well marry Ammon.&rdquo; It was as casual as that&hellip;</p>
         <p>&ldquo;I’ll stay two more years, then I’ll go to Utah. There are fewer Catholics there than in any other state. However, I like the Mormons because they accept no aid from the government but have their own mutual aid.&rdquo;</p>
         <p>He liked, too, the polygamous Mormons who defied the government and the concessions made by their own Church. Perhaps he was thinking of all the women friends he himself had.</p>
         <p>Mary came into his life six months before his projected departure. The first plan was that she would go west and work with him. When it was pointed out to Ammon that this was somewhat unconventional, he decided he could forget his anarchist principles to the extent of getting the marriage license from the city. He knew being married by a priest was necessary, of course.</p>
         <p>Difficulties began to arise with the chancery office. The Church moves slowly in such affairs. Neither Ammon or Mary was willing to give up their companionship, although they were perfectly willing to remain celebate. So Mary followed Ammon to Salt Lake City. She worked with him, opening up a house of hospitality on Post Office Place, which they call the Joe Hill House and <abbr>St.</abbr> Joseph’s Refuge. He named the house for <abbr>St.</abbr> Joseph, too, as a concession to Mary’s piety. Ammon lived in the house, while Mary had a furnished room nearby and did housework to pay for it. Ammon took jobs unloading freight to keep things going. Like the Mormons, they gave up tea, coffee, and cigarettes.</p>
         <p>Their &ldquo;Gandhi—and-Mira&rdquo; situation was not generally understood. In turn, they resented the bourgeois questioning of their relationship and stubbornly continued with it in spite of criticism from both Catholic and Mormon clergy.</p>
         <p>All through the summer they worked in the orchards. From their letters it appears Ammon did most of the picking, while Mary sat by the irrigation ditches and taught the children of the Mexican workers to paint and make toys for themselves.</p>
         <p>And then winter came, and with the cold, indoor work. Mary’s job as chambermaid in a rooming house was a hard one. She got up early each morning to go to Mass. The parish priest called her attention to the fact that she was out of place with the crowd of men who began to come around the little house of hospitality. He offered to give her carfare to San Francisco any time she wished to go. One day she got from him a bus ticket and an extra twenty-five dollars and—skipping the painful farewells—left early the next morning. She, who was a most devout convert, had fought with Ammon daily over his anticlericalism. So it should not have come as a surprise.</p>
         <p>But for Ammon it was a shock and he was deeply hurt. He blamed me (because Mary regarded me as her mother), and he blamed the priest as well.</p>
         <p>For a while Ammon used to write bitter letters to his Bishop, calling on him to speak out against capital punishment and injustice in general. I taxed him with being a most militant pacifist, and a most domineering anarchist. Now there are no more letters. His anger, which was never out of control before, has exhausted itself. He goes evenly on about his work.</p>
         <p>At various times he has said that he would move on, after a few years, to the West Coast, where his daughters are now living. But when I asked him in a recent letter if these were still his plans, he replied that he expected to end his life in Salt Lake City. He loves its beauty, he loves all that is good about the Mormons, and in time, I am sure, he will come to love the Bishop.</p>
         </blockquote>
         <p>Mary has continued to paint pictures for the Joe Hill House which she calls “ours,” She is working and going to night school, and growing up in San Francisco. I write her often and we talk on the phone when rates are cheaper. I have visited her several times. We love each other, but how it will work out in the future, time and circumstances will tell.</p>
         </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>Health without Medicine</h4>
        <p>Pacifists, anarchists, Catholics, and most of my friends are friendly to me, but when it comes to the subject of medicine they generally disagree more violently than they do to my other radical ideas. It seems they like their aspirins. When a person says that they do not believe in medicine they are generally called Christian Scientists. I have read all of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Eddy’s books and for ten years I attended their Church and read their lessons daily, and of course took no medicine. Neither did my daughters take any medicine, nor my wife. However my opposition to medicine is not based on the denial of disease, which is the Christian Science basis. To deny a thing does not remove its cause. Only in the case where disease is based on fear, and if Christian Science or any other idea can get rid of this fear, then can it heal the disease.</p>
        <p>I do not know of any one who has my ideas entirely on this subject. The person from whom I have received the most understanding is <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Herbert <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> Shelton, whom I mention previously in this book. He is editor of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">The Hygienic Review</i>, Box 1277, San Antonio, Texas. He has written many books on the subject. His idea is that disease is remedial, and is only an effort of the body to get rid of a toxic condition caused by wrong living, wrong eating, wrong thoughts. Another man from whom I received enlightenment is a former Christian Science practioner, William Walter, of Aurora, Illinois. He was so successful that the Christian Science leaders wanted to know his method. When he told them, and didn’t parrot the cliches of the Christian Science Church sufficiently or mention <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Eddy’s name often enough, he fell in disgrace from that church and started one of his own called &ldquo;Eschatology,&rdquo; with practitioners in many cities. I read their literature which said that every disease is caused by a <em>certain</em> sin, so if you cease that sin you will get well. This group, like the Christian Scientists supported war and had no sense of social responsibility. Whether they performed healings after the death of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Walter I do not know.</p>
        <p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Shelton teaches that because of our wrong way of living and eating our systems become clogged with impurities, and according to our inherited bodies we become susceptible to discomforts which medical folks call diseases. For instance in one person this toxemia results in diarrhea, in another boils, in another vomiting, in another fever, and finally when they have lived stupidly for long enough they get cancer. One of his sayings is that the stupid perish. The way to health, he says, is to cease eating any food, that is to go on a complete fast, drinking only preferably distilled water, to rest in bed, get plenty of fresh air and sunshine, and get rid of any mental worries, and the body will heal itself. When you are well you will become ill again if you continue your evil habits, so you should become a vegetarian, cease any smoking, drinking of alcohol, tea, coffee, cocoa, soft drinks. And of course never take any medicine of any kind. He says that medicine given to a dead body has no effect. That any foreign substance in the body is ejected by nature, such as pus collecting around a splinter in your finger and thus it is driven out. So medicine taken into the body is vomited or ejected somehow. This is the body acting on the foreign substance, not the medicine acting on the body. He says that the improvement in health is due to better sanitary conditions and not to vaccinations or inoculations. The wonder drugs kill more people than they are supposed to cure. He has had many thousands of people come to his rest home who are nearly dead, having tried every other way, and less than a score have died there. Many regaining their health and living for many years. The <abbr class="initialism">AMA</abbr> in states like New York and Ohio have caused the imprisonment of doctors who use his methods.</p>
        <p>I admit that it is well to have doctors who know the parts of the body so that in the case of an accident when a person is unconscious, bleeding, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, it can be attended to. Many reputable physicians will not indiscriminately give blood transfusions for they know that derelicts who sell their blood either do not know that they have had malaria or jaundice, or are in such a rush to get money to go on another spree that they lie about it, so that many deaths are caused by the injection of this impure blood into patients who are already ill. The death of many people is caused by the use of the so-called wonder drugs which have side effects upon the body not known until they have been tried upon patients. And people vary in their reaction to these poisons injected into their bodies under the guise of “helpful drugs.” I am not mentioning in detail the sleeping pills which cause the birth of deformed babies.</p>
        <p>There are four causes of diseases: First, the body which you have inherited which may be prone to certain weaknesses, such as heart trouble, diabetes, rheumatism, tuberculosis, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Or the habits of living which people in any certain occupation or in any certain geographical environment are accustomed to, such as Navajos smothering themselves in their stuffy hogans, coal miners whose work makes them liable to rheumatism, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> So every one has a web of circumstance which may help or hinder them throughout life.</p>
        <p>Second, the presence of fear. No matter if a person believes in God there are many who are forever fearful of everything that might happen. They are afraid of snakes, darkness, heights, cats, dogs, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> These fears may come from frightening childhood experiences which they have never overcome. They may be afraid of certain diseases, and as the Bible says that which they fear has come upon them.</p>
        <p>Third, there is the matter of stupidity. Some folks are told what to do but they are too stupid to understand or too inept to do anything for themselves. They can’t sleep; they don’t seem to digest their food. They are always ailing. If they were a bit alive they would look around them and see the people who are healthy and they would ask questions and perhaps learn something. They suffer from too much mucus in the form of catarrah, yet they must drink milk and eat starchy foods and imbibe more mucus. They have arthritis yet they keep on eating bloody meat, sweets, and starches and get worse. They go from one fake patent medicine to another and never learn.</p>
        <p>Fourth, there is this matter of sin. If any certain disease is not caused by the first three mentioned then it is caused by a certain weakness or sin. I will enumerate a few. Asthma is caused by smother love, the overprotection by the mother or other female relatives of children, especially boys, so that in order to breathe they have to get away from under the wings of the mother hen and breathe on their own. You find the grown boy whose mother must spread his bread for him, who hovers over him forever. She does not trust in God no matter how much she may go to Mass. Fears of ragweed, <abbr>etc.</abbr> on her part will prepare the boy for hayfever. Allergy specialists have told me that boys suffering from asthma and hayfever have been sent away to boarding schools and recovered in a few months, but as soon as their mothers visited them they commenced to breathe hard and choke. They have to get weaned sometime. In the case of anemia or tuberculosis a person may have lost their loved one, their job, or their faith, so there is no use of living. Neither is there any use of dying. They have nothing to live for so they just fade away. A study was made in Switzerland for years by doctors of tuberculiar patients and its was found that with one lung the patient could live if he had some reason for living. In some cases a love affair was patched up, in others an interest was found in life. Vain and greedy folks want to be first in everything. They rush around and overtax their heart. When they die someone else will perform the work. Diabetes is a gluttons disease. They eat and eat until they can’t eat any more. The person who is forever fighting and arguing may very well be always bothered with the common cold. In more aggravated cases when food is not digested because of the anger which happens many times at meals colitis ensues. Years ago experiments were made at Harvard University where cats were fed liver and then a dog was presented to them and their stomachs were in a turmoil for hours. Continual disturbance may cause gall stones. But in the case of the stolid temperment where there is not anger in the form of action but where the supposed insult is covered up and the person sulks and hates and will not speak, tumors and cancer often occur. God sends love, but you only grouch and hug this hatred to yourself until it eats you up. There is no cure for real cancer, although often a benign tumor is diagnosed mistakenly as cancer. You have met the stiff-necked person who stubbornly will not listen to a new idea. He is always right, even in his parochial ignorance. Thus rheumatism, arthritis, or constipation is brought on by stubbornness. Opposition to ideas of others is always personalized. I often say that the difference between this kind of a person and myself is that I am firm while he is stubborn. Then there are the scare diseases: polio, the virus, and all sorts of epidemics. “Do you have the virus yet?” Every pain is called a symptom of the current fad in disease. Babies who have no sins fall ill because of the fog of fear surrounding them.</p>
        <p>Now suppose you have a bad inheritance, are afraid, stupid, and a sinner of many varieties, what can you do about it? If you have already taken insulin for years, fasting will be of little help for you will be liable to go into a coma, but in the first stages fasting will help you. It may require several fasts of from 30 to 70 days before your body is in a condition of health. But if you go back to your evil habits you will get sick again. Do not try fasting at home where all oppose you. Go to some health home like that of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Shelton’s.</p>
        <p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Time</i> magazine of 1-15-63 reports that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Frederick <abbr class="name">R.C.</abbr> Johnstone of Vancouver General Hospital tells that of those who were given antibiotics that infections were three times that of those who received none. He states that “antibiotics kill off the weaker germs and leave the field wide open for the more dangerous bacilli to multiply.” And in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">San Francisco Examiner</i> of <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 20, 1962, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Philip Thorek of the Illinois Medical School says, “Many thousands of people are dying this year because of blood transfusions, often after the surgeon has done his work skillfully and without apparent complications.” “Transfusions could be lethal,” Doctor Thorek said, “because donor blood may be incompatible to the patient who receives it. Such incompatibility, the surgeon said, may occur for many reasons, including wrong composition, too much or too little of a given chemical in the donor’s blood; wrong concentratin, the content that the patient needs; and, wrong rate of administration, too much blood given too fast can put a deadly burden on the heart that must pump it, while too little given too slowly may fail to correct the deficiency. Also, Doctor Thorek said, blood given may be weaker or stronger in total chemical; donor blood may carry the invisible and unfilterable germs of debilitating or mortal diseases, including hepatitis, malaria and syphilis.”</p>
        <p>The Associated Press of May 29, 1963 tells of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Elaine Johnson of Los Angeles who completed a supervised fast in Wadsworth Veterans Hospital where she fasted for 117 days and lost 136 of her 315 pounds. And during the previous winter we all read of the man and woman plane-wrecked in Alaska who went 43 days on snow watier and lived.</p>
        <p>When I criticize churches and the state I do not infer that individual churchmen and politicians are knowingly wicked people, but as I have told judges when I am in court, they are in a bad business. Likewise with doctors, who many times are humane and self sacrificing, but who like the others, they have been brought up not to question the way they make a living. I have had mature doctors agree with nearly all of my ideas on medicine, but what can they do about it when people are so foolish and want to take poison to cure them instead of changing their way of life. The whole anarchist philosophy teaches the responsibility of the individual, and not dependance upon clergy, politicians, doctors, lawyers, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
        <p>I met a woman, now a member of The Order of Aaron, who, when much younger, had been taken to a hospital here in Salt Lake City for an operation. She was in great pain, and as the doctors assembled for the operation she asked them if there was not someone she could first call upon to pray and “lay on hands” for a successful operation. She did not belong to any church, but from reading the Bible in her youth she had this idea. They left the room and called some Mormon Elders in who prayed, and in a few minutes she was healed and did not need the operation. This was indeed faith. Then she commenced to read the Book of Mormon and joined their church. For over ten years she faithfully tried to be a good Mormon but the more she read in their books the more she saw that they did not practice the United Order and were lax in their fidelity to The Word of Wisdom. Finally she joined this new group which I describe in the chapter on Communities. Some hysterical people may be temporarily healed by such evangelists as Orel Roberts, but as he does not preach right living, but only faith, it is likely that those whom he has “cured” will again become ill, for the cause of their illness was not effected. Likewise at Lourdes a few healings occur each year. Mormon Elders are upon call to heal the sick and as I live here I will undoubtedly learn more of this part of their religion. Their Word of Wisdom stresses a clean life. Doubtless some Christian Scientists heal those whose illness is caused basically by fear, but as their church increaingly has been commercialized, along with all others, not much can be expected from them in the matter of health.</p>
        </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>Moral Rearmament</h4>
        <p>I have referred previously in this book as to the Moral Rearmament group being the worst fraud in modern times. I refer to it again upon reading a full page ad in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">New York Times</i> in which they list sixteen ideas which they are for, and opposite them ideas which they are against. For instance they are <em>for</em> Intelligent National Security and <em>against</em> sexual deviates in high places who protect potential spies. They are <em>for</em> peace but <em>against</em> Pacifism. They claim to be absolutely pure and make this as an excuse to uphold rent, interest, profit, and armaments of the capitalist system, and boast of the labor leaders and Communists whom they have turned from their wrong way of life to the <abbr class="initialism">MRA</abbr> which bolsters up capitalism. What makes them such a fraud is that they claim to be better than those outside of their belief, meanwhile their personal salvation that they boast so much about does not prevent them from supporting every evil of capitalism except race prejudice; yet we never heard of any of them leaving their lives of luxury and joining picket lines or freedom-riders.</p>
        </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>First Customer</h4>
        <p>When Mary and I were picking cherries and before we had started this house we worked with a man who lived upstairs in the Japanese Hotel who was seldom sober. He thought we ought to be a financial success in our new “restaurant” and kept telling us that he would be our first customer, for unless we had a first customer we would never have any more and would not succeed. So my orders to all of the help is that any time the “first customer” comes in, drunk or sober, he is to be served what he wants. After his cup of coffee or soup he ceremoniously gives us a dime “so we won’t go broke,” and we take it in that spirit.</p>
        <p>Carl, the cook who has been here the longest, has drank liquor all of his life and has no intentions of stopping now at the age of 79. He never gets loud. I tell him not to bring liquor in the house, so he has friends who buy him a drink at the tavern nearby. One night he had half of a glass of liquor under his bed and went to rejuvenate himself when he found a dead mouse in it. This news was too good to keep, and we all had a good laugh over his mousetrap. I will not buy any mousetraps, telling them that if they want to take their cigarette and liquor money and buy a trap they can do so.</p>
        <p>One goodnatured man who stayed here all one winter and helped get food from the market, and who claimed to be an old time <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr>, left and took with him anything that he could steal in order that he would not run short of liquor on the way. My gloves did not fit him but he stole them. A cook also stole my gloves, and others have stolen raincoats, shoes, cigarette lighters, and anything that they can pick up. One drunk whom I had put out a score of times for bringing in liquor was sobering up in the cooler, and hidden in his shirt was an alarm clock that we found missing, and hid under his pillow was a bottle partly full of liquor. I poured it out and made him leave, for he knew better. All of these men are bigger than I am but they seldom offer any opposition, except to blandly lie and say they are not drunk, when they can hardly stand up. One fellow was drinking from his bottle in the night and insisted that it was not <em>his</em> bottle. I told him shame for stealing someone else’s liquor, and poured it out and put him out. I do not snoop around searching for bottles, but when I step on them I empty them. The men take it good naturedly. I know it is a losing battle and I do not expect to win.</p>
        </section>
	<section epub:type="subchapter">
        <h4>Christmas Message 1962</h4>
        <p>“Truth is forever on the scaffold; error forever on the throne” (but you don’t have to be a part of it). People are naturally good, if it doesn’t cost them anything, but in this mercenary larcenized age let nearly all professedly religious people think that they may not get a promotion, or someone else may get their jobs, then the primeval beast appears to defend the status quo.</p>
        <p>They say that they are saved and that they believe in heaven, but they really don’t believe in the hereafter, for their religion teaches them that they cannot take it with them, so they hold on tight to their fortunes and consider that they are poor if they have to dig into their principal, because they do not receive enough dividends or interest.</p>
        <p>Whether through inheritance of the example of beneficent friends or relatives many folks of any religion or of no religion are a fine example of ethical living. They may believe that <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter, Mohammed, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Eddy, or Joseph Smith received a special revelation superceding all others, and that their Church is the True One, and they may follow most of the rules laid down by their leaders, but, as Tolstoy says, this does not prevent them from being kind, considerate, self-sacrificing, and truly noble people. An outsider meeting them would tend to be attracted to their religion because of the good example they present. But the real truth is that if they changed religions or belonged to no religion they would still be the same fine people. Thus the anonymous woman who gave us a turkey one year and two hams last year belongs to no church and her husband is a former Catholic who belongs to the Japanese Buddhist Church. The Mormon Bishop who sent us 240 pints of syrup, and the Greek Orthodox who gives us a basket of candy once a week, as well as other Mormons who help us here at our mission are good examples of their religions, while the Catholics who boycott us are a bad example.</p>
        <p>There are others, and I expect they are the great majority, who have had a bad physical and emotional inheritance and environment and who, whether they know it or not, are motivated by the fears which their religious or their material environment presents to them. So they go through the forms and ceremonies, or go to psychiatrists, and are forever in a state of frustrated doubt, which even to admit, frightens them into going through forms and ceremonies to ward off evil. No matter what they may say, their attitude is placating the devil rather than worshipping God. The mercenary leaders of these churches grow fat on the fears of their dupes—and they may themeslves be placating the Evil One (all in the name of God). They are not to be blamed overly much for they have been conditioned that to read or think of anything “controversial” is a sin, and with these blinders their religion is clearly what Marx said, an “opiate.” If they change religions they are no better for their whole pattern is based on fear of losing their souls.</p>
        <p>Some can enter Orders, or on the outside blindly stress the virtue of obedience, and not being of an inquiring mind, but being of the “sheep mentality,” they are relatively happy in thinking that they will be saved. “Why give freedom to sheep? They only bleat,” says Max Stirner.</p>
        <p>There are a number of others, no matter what their previous environment has been, who faintly see through all this fear and fraud but feel incompetent to deal with it, so they eat, drink, take the newest dope, and like to think that they are happy. They may be fine people who spread good cheer or they may be larceny-minded.</p>
        <p>We find men elevated as leaders, or as leader of a religion who accept war, exploitation, capital punishment, and all the modern evils, and they see no contradiction between the wonderful ethics pronounced by the leaders of their religions and their denial of these ethics in their daily lives. Now at Christmas time they have a faint glimmering that comes through and they for the moment really mean what they say when they call for brotherhood, peace, kindliness, yet they are surrounded, and they consciously keep themselves surrounded, by yes men and lickspittles so that nothing is really ever done that will cripple their power or decrease their revenue.</p>
        <p>A person is tempted to agree with Charles Erskine Scott Wood who years ago wrote the book, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Heaveniy Discourse</i>, in which God, <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter, Christ, <abbr>etc.</abbr> are discussing what is going on in this crazy world, and God is dodging the prayers that are sent up to Him. If one were to believe that the Jews were God’s chosen people and they would multiply as the sands of the sea, then they could also believe that He thought He would take another chance and send Christ to bring the people around to His ways. But the Orthodox killed him. Then when His Church continually denied Him after Constantine, killed millions in religious wars and massacres, and had their Inquisition in Spain and America, it is conceivable that God would find the Prophet Mohammed. But the Mohammedans did almost as bad as the others. Then it could be that when Joseph Smith prayed and asked God which was the real religion that he was told that none of them lived up to their function, and that he was told to start the real one; that there was progression in spirituality in this world and in other worlds besides this one, and that he was to collect the “saints” who would lead this life in their United Order with no rich or poor and in the agricultural simplicity in which all religions have had their origin. While Catholics had generally forgotten the healing of the sick which was done in the early days before they became dominant, the Mormons practiced it, and they still do.</p>
        <p>Mrs. Eddy came along “divinely inspired and without human hypothesis” and founded her Church, and in the same time the Seventh Day Adventists thought the world was coming to an end and at a certain date and set up their religion as a “one and only” featuring Saturday as a Holy Day instead of Sunday. At this time Alexander Campbell felt that there should be One True Church, so he founded the Campbellite Church or Disciples Church which was to be that Church.</p>
        <p>Looking over the world today it can easily be seen that no church, despite their protestations, has any intention of following the Sermon on the Mount. In fact, if you talk about it you will get into trouble with politicians who have been elevated to run the churches.</p>
        <p>It could be that God also tried to bring His program across by inspiring individuals, rather than to start another church, and so brought forth Gandhi among the Hindus, Tolstoy among the Russians, and Schweitzer among the Protestants, and John Woolman and Rufus Jones among the Quakers, as he earlier tried to remind Catholics through <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis, <abbr>St.</abbr> Catherine, <abbr>St.</abbr> Joan, and the young girl at Lourdes.</p>
        <p>What can an honest, sincere, and wide awake person do who belongs to any of these religions or none of them? All religions are a mockery of God no matter if they were once started by inspired Prophets. Truly the Catholic Lord Acton said that “power tends to corrupt, and absolute power corrupts absolutely.”</p>
        <p>All that anyone who belongs to any church can do is to know that inspiration is not dead: that “all things work together for good to those who love God.” And as Thoreau said, to take one world at a time, and work within the groups where he is located, and those who are not too far corrupted will appreciate it. It would seem that organized religion is bound to be corrupted. When God plans to resurrect those of any or of no religion and start a new world is anyone’s guess. The billions spent on going to Venus or the Moon, when we can’t run our own world, is based on military domination of the world by the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> or Russia. All organized churches go along with this “my country right or wrong” and in this respect are most evil institutions (that is except the Quakers, Brethren, and Mennonites) who support taxes for war and obedience to governments, national and world. It would seem that the True Church is composed of those in all churches or in no church who courageously live up to the highest teachings of their Prophets. No new Church needs to be started or it would become as bad as the others. Stay in the Church of your choice, or remain outside, and be a witness by your life for Truth against the rulers of this world and the rulers of the Church who prefer Caesar to Christ.</p>
		</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
