<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter8" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 8</h2>
				<h3>Working⁠–⁠Fasting⁠–⁠Picketing</h3>
				<h3>1951</h3>
				<h4>Phoenix⁠–⁠Hopiland</h4>
			</header>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Hopi Initiation</h3>
				<p>My Hopi friend had invited all of us to the initiation dances in late February. This dance is not public, but an outsider can come by invitation. It is for children of about six years of age, who have received presents on holidays and birthdays from masked kachinas. They are to graduate from this phase of life into the next, or “no Santa Claus” phase⁠—but it is all a ceremonial plan, and not a deceit as it is with us. Even at that early age, Hopi children know the how and why of babies.</p>
				<p>Rik and family and I left late on a Friday morning, by way of Black Canyon Road. Joe Craigmyle had supposedly left the night before with some citrus Ginny had picked for the Hopi, and with some of his own from his fruit stand. But you never can tell where Joe is until you actually see him there. He could change his mind or fall asleep on the way. Within 70 miles, Ginny’s boys saw the first snow of their lives, at Mayer, <abbr class="postal eoc">Ariz.</abbr></p>
				<p>Getting into Flagstaff, we said hello to Virgil and Ysobel Maddox, and went to Piatt Cline’s. Piatt had to be out of town at an <abbr class="initialism">AP</abbr> convention. Between the two houses, a car skidded into us, and we had to stay over a day to get the repairs made. Due to modern technical efficiency, the brake man wouldn’t touch or give an opinion about the fender, and neither the brake nor the fender man about the alignment or the motor. But after much red tape we got going, shortly before dark, for New Oraibi.</p>
				<p>We saw, in the distance, the panorama of the mesas in the setting sun. This alone was worth the trip.</p>
				<p>Getting in at ten <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr>, we found that our Hopi friend and Joe had waited for us until half an hour before, and had gone to Hotevilla, where the initiation was taking place. We went there, and Ezra, a nephew of Dan, and one of the Hopi <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>s, took us to Fred’s house, where we met our Hopi friend and Joe. We visited until midnight, and then went to the snake kiva, which had a side entrance where you did not have to go down the ladder from the top.</p>
				<p>The Kiva held several hundred people. A Zuni Indian sat next to me. Kachinas, with and without masks, danced, and then dancers from the other seven Kivas came down the ladder and danced. Children of both sexes sat on benches around the walls, wide-eyed. They had sat there, off and on, for four days. Women came, and gave them a drink of water at times. Rik, Ginny, Ammon, Joe got sleepy in turn, and left about 4 <abbr class="time eoc">a.m.</abbr> Eight-year-old Keith stayed until daylight, when the kachinas took off their masks. The children were told that they did not live in the San Francisco mountains near Flagstaff, but were only aunts and uncles⁠—but not to tell the smaller children. They would learn when it was time. They were then told the duties and admonitions which would make them good Hopi, and not <i xml:lang="hop">ka-Hopi</i>, which means “bad-Hopi.”</p>
				<p>Mutton, hominy, and an especial sweet cornmeal pudding were on hand, and everywhere we went we ate some of it. We slept a little, and visited with our Hopi friend. We also visited Don, the Sun Chief on top of Old Oraibi. We went to Shungopovy to see Andrew, and to ancient Walpi on the huge rock. As we entered Walpi, kachinas were whipping (a form of mock fun) all those who were caught outside of a house as the procession was coming. We waited with a thousand people for the opening exercises but, as it was getting late, we left before we stood the chance of getting lost in the winding, unmarked desert roads.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Anarchism</h3>
				<p>That night Piatt and Barbara welcomed us. In true Mormon hospitality, Barbara had baked a birthday cake for Ginny. Piatt found an autographed copy of Marcus Graham’s <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Anthology of Revolutionary Poetry</i>, which he had purchased from the author in a hotel in Denver years ago, and gave it to me.</p>
				<p>I had written in his atheistic and bombastic monthly paper <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Man!</i> for about ten years, and when he issued a booklet on Anarchism, he allowed me the honor of giving the definition, although there were many anarchists more capable. I stressed the ethical view. I quote from page 8 on <i epub:type="se:name:publication:essay">Anarchism, a Solution to World Problems</i>, issued by <i epub:type="se:name">Man!</i>, <abbr class="initialism">P.O.</abbr> Box 971, Los Angeles, <abbr class="postal">Cal.</abbr> 1940.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Anarchism has been called non-state Socialism. Despite the popular idea of anarchists as violent men, Anarchism is the <em>one</em> nonviolent social philosophy. It is the very antithesis of Communism and Fascism which places the State as supreme. Anarchists will do away with the State entirely. The function of the Anarchist is twofold. By daily courage in non-cooperation with the tyrannical forces of the State and the Church, he helps to tear down present society; the Anarchist by daily cooperation with his fellows in overcoming evil with goodwill and solidarity builds toward the anarchistic commonwealth which is formed by voluntary action with the right of secession.</p>
					<p>The basis of Anarchism is liberty with individual responsibility. Its methods are decentralization of activity and federation of local communes for national and international functions.</p>
					<p>Simplicity is emphasized. Courage and freedom are its watchwords. Anarchism, having faith in the innate goodness within everyone, seeks to establish the Golden Rule by working from within the consciousness of the individual, while all other systems of society, working from without, depend upon man-made laws and violence of the State to compel men to act justly. Anarchists seek to slowly change the forms of society but do not rely upon that change alone to make people better.</p>
					<p>And now a definition from the Encyclopedia Britannica:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p><b>Anarchism</b>: the name given to a principle or theory of life and conduct under which society is conceived without government⁠—harmony in such a society being obtained, not by submission to law, or by obedience to any authority, but by free agreements concluded between the various groups, territorial and professional, freely constituted for the sake of production and consumption, as also for the satisfaction of the infinite variety of needs and aspirations of a civilized being. In a society developed on these lines, the voluntary associations which already now begin to cover all the fields of human activity would take a still greater extension so as to substitute themselves for the state in all its functions.</p>
					</blockquote>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>March Tax Picketing</h3>
				<p>About a week before the time for picketing the tax man on March 14, I went over to Rik and Ginny’s to make up the leaflet. I had already written what I thought was good, but from previous experience knew that the best things require much effort. That night they were going to see Father Dunne’s play <i epub:type="se:name:publication:play">Trial by Fire</i>, and I was babysitting for them. I read the manuscript of my leaflet after supper, and Rik asked me if I were going to picket on Sunday. I told him that he knew it was on a Wednesday. He laughed and said that what I had written sounded like a sermon, and that it would never do. Ginny agreed.</p>
				<p>“What are people interested in when they see you picketing? Talk about that,” Rik said as he left for the play. After the boys had their numerous drinks of water, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and all was quiet, it came to me that most people wanted to know how I got by with it. In a short time, I had written another entirely new leaflet.</p>
				<p>I never make my signs much ahead of time, for something important may happen that must be used for the substance of a sign. The Saturday evening before March 14th, Rik, Ginny, and I worked until 2:30 Sunday morning getting the exact words for my posters. A hundred suggestions were made, but with us no sign is made unless it “clicks” and has the approval of all. The first sign was about my nonpayment of taxes, as usual, and needed no discussion. Operation Killer had just been in the news, coming from General Ridgeway, and Rik provided the words: <em>“Operation Killer will bring the peace of the graveyard. Not world peace.”</em></p>
				<p>News had come about the Senate approval of Universal Military Training, and Ginny suggested that something showing our disapproval be given in a sign. It took hours but finally the following emerged: <em>“The end of the American Dream: Universal Military Training.”</em></p>
				<p>We did not want our posters to be the same as on previous picketings. We hunted through the Scriptures, made scores of suggestions, but the final words seemed to elude us. About 2:30 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr>, the following seemed to ring true: <em>“God is not mocked.”</em></p>
				<p>So after mass, I went forward to picket. A postman, with his load on a bicycle, saw me as I adjusted my signs, and asked for a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and whatever leaflet I had. Very few people refused the green leaflet. I gave <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s to those who were especially interested.</p>
				<p>Two elderly men thought I was advertising some accountant who would help them make out their tax reports. Another man asked me: “How do you get by with it?” I told him that I knew he was going to ask just that question, so I had the answer. He took my green leaflet with that title good-naturedly. One postal employee asked me who paid me for my picketing. I told him that I did it on my own, quitting work on the farm where I would earn $6, and spending as much for my posters and leaflets. “Now that is what I call <em>believing</em> in a thing. I’ll read what you got there,” he said.</p>
				<p>I had noticed a sickly-looking man, with a dog on a chain. I passed him several times. Later, he was across the street, and called for me to come over, saying that a man in the business establishment wanted to read my signs. I went over, gave them my literature, answered the question again to the effect that no one was paying me, that I was on my own. The man with the dog wanted to read the sign on my back, and asked me to turn around. I did so, and he tore it off, saying that I should not use God’s name. The proprietor shunted my assailant out of the store saying, “This is a free country. You invited this man in here, and you can’t start a roughhouse in my place.”</p>
				<p>I went across the street and continued my picketing, when a woman walking behind me, touched me on the shoulder, and, taking out a pocket knife, said, “Here, I fix that sign so you can carry it again.” It was Tilly Lashoo. A couple of years before, when I had been away for a few days, I came home and found the screen near my door cut, the door open, and Tilly sleeping in my bed. She had looked up my address, after escaping from “solitary” in a mental institution in Los Angeles and, with much more acumen than most, had found where I lived. She showed me a letter from the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> praising her for work she had done at our Chicago house. She worked the fields, and lived in a sort of shanty-dump away south of the tracks. She claimed that she was very wealthy from properties in Detroit, and that she had been put away in order that others could get her wealth. She said she was part Chinese and part Navajo, and had me write letters to her mother who owned a big market in Los Angeles, to her son who was a doctor in New York City, and to her sister who lived there also; letters to her husband in California, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, but they all came back. Tilly thought that men, especially Mexicans, were about to rape her, so she kept an axe, a club, and butcher knife to properly attend to any males who showed up. She said I was the only man who had not tried to rape her. If I worked nights, she would be as quiet as a mouse while I slept, or if I was typewriting, and would soak sheets in water, hang them up by the screen, and produce a homemade air conditioner. But if I was not asleep or writing, she would talk my head off. She generally ate by herself. She would stay for several weeks, and all at once would be gone, and a shirt or coat of mine would be missing, and in its place would be a lock of hair tied around with a string, which would bring me good luck. I had not seen her for a year, and now she came along, did me this service, and walked on. Months later I received a letter from the court in Los Angeles, saying that her husband had died, and owned two properties, and had money in two banks. I gave Tilly ten dollars fare to go back to California, but she told me a week later she lost it and would hike that way herself. Years later I received a letter from her from the same asylum from which she had escaped. Folks teased me about “my woman,” but there was no way of telling her not to come or go, for she did as she pleased.</p>
				<p>My first tax man of three years earlier, a Catholic veteran, greeted me kindly. Other tax men asked for my literature, and kidded some of their more patriotic co-workers, asking me for literature for them. Cars were parked all along, and someone was generally waiting in them. I offered them literature, and it was usually accepted.</p>
				<p>One man who attends <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s, and had openly cursed me and the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> as Communist, tried to pick an argument with me on the idea that the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> was a Communist, and not a Catholic, paper. I told him that this could not be so, for on the night before I had been introduced by Father Bechtel, in the basement of Our Lady of Good Counsel Church, in the nearby College town of Tempe, to the Newman Club, and had openly advocated the Christian Anarchist principle of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. This man did not believe it, and was going to report me to the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr>. I told him he was wasting his time, for they already had a file on me. A priest from <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s came by later, and greeted me gladly. Joe Craigmyle, Arizona’s only non-registrant, came by and carried my sign for 15 minutes while I rested. A large hotel is across from the post office; I noticed a man whom I thought was a wealthy former employer of mine of Albuquerque. I phoned him, and he was surprised to hear me. I did not invite him over, but mailed him my literature. Cliff Sherrill, the father of Bob Sherrill, who had given me such good publicity three years ago on Anna Roosevelt’s daily, stopped and greeted me kindly. He had been a reporter in Atlanta in 1917, when I was in prison there, had the prison beat, and knew of my story. On my last round, a big man struck his fist at my sign. Perhaps I had come too close to him. The newsman was cheerful; one of his helpers had worked with the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> in Boston years ago.</p>
				<p>Just as Rik drove up, and I had 20 steps to get to his car, a young man tapped me on the shoulder and asked me if I had met any veterans that day. I told him I had. He asked me if any of them had tried to knock me down. I replied that they hadn’t. His next remark was: “Well, here’s one that feels like it.” I talked to him for ten minutes before he changed his mind. I can’t remember a bit of what I said, but it must have been good, for I always do better under pressure, like Clarence Darrow.</p>
				<p>About fifty people had greeted me kindly, and about the same number had grunted disapproval. About 750 had accepted the leaflet, and I saw less than a dozen thrown away. I gave out 150 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s.</p>
				<p>It seems that, at a certain stage, a prophet has little honor in his home town, for the newspapers did not mention my picketing. I had noticed the police of my activity, but they did not bother me. That night, a radio broadcaster, who is the chief red-baiter in this vicinity, quoted from the literature of the Fellowship of Reconciliation, which he called a Commie Front, to the effect that two thirds of income taxes went for war. He had read my leaflet to his audience when I picketed <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 18th, and said that I was a Commie, and so was the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> Communist. Several people phoned in and defended me. Now I learn that someone brought my leaflet to class at the Phoenix Union High School, and a teacher asked a Catholic girl about it. She had never heard of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, so she asked a priest about it. He did not know much about it either, so asked a priest at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s, who explained that the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> was a good paper. So at least one girl and one priest knew more about the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>.</p>
				<p>The leaflet I handed out read as follows:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<h4>How do I get by with it?</h4>
					<p>I don’t know for sure.</p>
					<p>I have picketed thirteen days in the last three years here in Phoenix against war, the draft, and paying taxes for all this. I have been detained by the police and released four times, and been called to the tax office often.</p>
					<p>I was a conscientious objector in both World Wars. In 1942 I refused to register for the draft and resigned from a civil service job in Milwaukee where I had been a social worker for eleven years. As I do not believe in shooting I have since then worked on farms where no withholding tax is taken from my pay, so I do not buy a gun for others to shoot. The tax man has tried to garnishee my wages; now I work by the day for different farmers and if necessary am paid in advance in order that no garnishee is effective.</p>
					<p>I believe in the idea of voluntary poverty, somewhat after the pattern of <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis, Thoreau, Tolstoy, and Gandhi. I have no car or anything the tax man can get. I make a true report of my income but openly refuse to pay a cent of tax.</p>
					<p>I am a non-church Christian. I believe in the Sermon on the Mount, especially because it is more revolutionary than opportunistic Communist tactics. I do not put my trust in money or bombs, but in God.</p>
					<p>I am an Anarchist who believes that all government exists not to help people but to continue in power exploiters, bureaucrats, and politicians who keep us on the run with their continual depressions and wars.</p>
					<p>If you believe in capitalism and war and think you get your money’s worth in paying taxes that is your business. My message is to those who are beginning to question the idea that preparing for war brings peace. It is also to those who believe somewhat as I do but who are afraid to stand up and say so.</p>
					<p>If you begin to see through the assertion of the warmongers that we are for defense⁠—while we invade foreign countries⁠—then you should read my tax statement in full as printed in the <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 1951 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Catholic Worker</i>, 223 Chrystie <abbr>St.</abbr>, New York City, obtainable from me free of charge on the picket line or by request to my address below.</p>
					<p>If you are ready for my message here is a starter:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p><em>Refuse</em> to become a soldier<br/><em>Refuse</em> to make munitions<br/><em>Refuse</em> to buy war bonds<br/><em>Refuse</em> to pay income taxes</p>
						<p><em>Study</em> the Sermon on the Mount<br/><em>Study</em> Gandhi’s nonviolent methods<br/><em>Study</em> Jefferson’s idea of life on the land<br/>“<em>Study</em> war no more.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>“Better to light a candle than curse the darkness.” A Christian Anarchist does both.</p>
					<p>March 14, 1951<br/>Ammon <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Hennacy,<br/><abbr class="initialism">R.</abbr> 3, Box 221<br/>Phoenix, Arizona.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>No State Tax Paid</h3>
				<p>Aside from paying taxes to the United States I also consider it wrong to pay taxes to the state of Arizona, so on March 15th, I wrote them this letter.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Tax Collector, State of Arizona.</p>
					<p>Dear Sir:</p>
					<p>I made $1,491 in 1950 working as a day laborer for farmers. Whether I owe the state a tax or not does not make any difference to me for I do not intend to pay it. I wrote to your department the last two years to this effect. I am enclosing the statement of reasons why I do not pay my federal income tax and the same holds for the state of Arizona as it is part of the capitalist system and furnished a guard in wars and a militia to put down strikers.</p>
					<p>I consider that the 2% sales tax which I cannot help but pay is sufficient to pay for walking upon the highways. I do not ask or accept police protection and do not want any pension, subsidy, or help from the state. I do not desire to help pay for the upkeep of prisons, courts, and reform schools which deny the Sermon on the Mount. Any services that the state performs could be done much cheaper and better by the people themselves. Neither do I favor handing out millions of dollars in old age pensions to people who do not need it, in many cases to old folks who turn over their property to their children and ask for a pension because everyone else is getting it. This is not the Pioneer Spirit or the true American Way of Life.</p>
					<p><abbr class="initialism eoc">P.S.</abbr> Here is a copy of a leaflet which I handed out when I picketed the federal tax man yesterday.</p>
					<p>Sincerely,<br/>Ammon A. Hennacy</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Hopi Protest to Governor Pyle</h3>
				<p>There was a bill up in the legislature to legalize sale of liquor to the Indians, if and when the Federal Government also withdrew restrictions. Four Hopis, the interpreter, Andrew, Dan, and Ralph, of Tucson, stayed overnight with me. They dictated the following letter, which I wrote for the Hopi to the Governor.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Phoenix, Arizona,<br/>March 27, 1951</p>
					<p>Dear Governor Pyle:</p>
					<p>In order that it may be fresh in your mind concerning the conversation which you had with us of the Hopi yesterday we are summarizing our thoughts.</p>
					<p>It came to our attention this last Saturday that there was to be a meeting of Congressmen here in Phoenix to discuss Indian affairs. One of our leaders, Andrew Heremquaftewa of the mother village of Shungopovy, was busy with religious ceremonials but he felt that this land problem was also important so he left these sacred ceremonials and came to Phoenix.</p>
					<p>We are not able to find signs of any meeting and it was suggested that we call at your office. We did so and are pleased to have met you. We find now for the first time that you have signified your intention of signing a bill granting the sale of liquor to Indians. We understand that your desire is not to increase the number of drunken Indians but that you feel the Indians should be citizens and become a part of the white man’s civilization and that this approval of the sale of liquor is just the first step in this direction.</p>
					<p>Perhaps you have not known of the Hopi traditions. In order that you may understand why we oppose the sale of liquor to Indians we will tell you the way we look at life. The name Hopi means “<em>Peaceful</em>.” We were the first people to inhabit this land; it was given to us by our God Massau’u. He gave us instructions of how to live pure, clean, and spiritual lives. We have held to this tradition even though we have been put in chains, beaten and punished, and our land stolen.</p>
					<p>We live where there is no irrigation. We depend upon rain to grow our corn, melons, peaches, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> The white man has sought to make rain by a machine in the clouds; you have also made huge bombs and have stolen the fire from the Sun for deviltry. Whether liquor is just one part of the white man’s way, an essential part perhaps, we do not know, but we do know that we do not want anything to do with the artificial way of life of the white man. <em>We will get rain if our lives are pure and if we fast and pray and are humble in seeking forgiveness for our sins.</em></p>
					<p>Our God has told us centuries ago of the great wars that would come and of a third great war which will purify by fire this evil generation. He has told us long ago of wagons that run without horses and of men traveling by machines in the sky. All this is not new to us. If we remain true to our traditional teaching of prayer, fasting, and true living then we will not be found wanting when that Day comes. If we look around and find our girls and boys drunken we will be judged for having made this possible. You too are a religious man and a leader of your people. You should not take this matter lightly. We tell you that if you wish to solve this question in the truly democratic way you should give the Indians time to have a plebiscite in this matter. We are not telling you what to sign or what not to sign. That is up to you as Governor. We are only bringing it to your attention that the white man has always made rules and laws concerning the Indian but never asking the Indian what he thinks about it. You should think this matter over in your own heart and pray to your God for guidance before you do this thing.</p>
					<p>There is another matter that we wish to speak to you about. This land that was given to us is held sacred to us as a Peaceful Land. We are told by Massau’u that our oil and minerals must be used for peaceful purposes and not nor war. When desolation of war does come there must be some place of refuge, some place where peaceful people are found who remain true to their sacred teachings. We do not wish to be soldiers in foreign countries to kill people. This is also an evil part of the white man’s way of life called civilization and progress. We do not want to have anything to do with war. We have made no agreement or treaty with the government regarding our land or regarding our being soldiers, therefore it is a violation of all honor and justice to draft our boys to fight in any war. We will not allow our boys to be soldiers.</p>
					<p>A year ago we went to Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr>, and told the authorities that we did not recognize their jurisdiction to decide what land was ours and what belonged to the whites. We are now and have been for centuries a sovereign nation owing fealty only to our God. We have gone to Washington and now to Phoenix but we are not going to have any more meetings in the white man’s big cities. We want the next meeting to be held in Hopiland with all of our people and religious leaders. You mentioned that there were different groups of people among the Hopi and you wondered if we represented the majority of the Hopi. We represent the traditional leaders and if you come to Hopiland we will have a meeting of young and old, not in a smoke-filled room in secret, but in the open where the sun can be witness to the truth in our hearts. In the past government men have listened to Hopi who have government jobs and have sought to subvert the Hopi away from their true peaceful life.</p>
					<p>Sincerely yours,<br/>Dan Katchongva, Advisor, Sun Clan, Hotevilla.<br/>Andrew Hermequaftewa, Advisor, Blue Bird Clan, Shungopovy; Interpreter, Oraibi.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The Governor signed the liquor bill. The night before the Hopi left, we had phoned and made an appointment with Congressman Toby Morris, at the Hotel Westward Ho. As I went to the desk to inquire for him, I saw him and introduced myself, saying I had Hopi with me who wished to see him. He replied that he already had a meeting with the Hopi. “With the government Hopi,” I told him. He looked guilty, and said he would be back in a minute, and headed toward the bar. Soon he came around and motioned for the Hopi to come outside in the cold wind, where he put his arm around them and told them he was their true friend. We had heard the same words in Washington <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr> from him.</p>
				<p>Around this time Alan Haywood, <abbr class="initialism">C.I.O.</abbr> organizer, spoke in the High School Auditorium. I stood outside and sold <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s, and later went inside and listened to second-rate pep talks. After the meeting, I spoke to Haywood, gave him a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, and told him that <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>s had picketed <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s when Cardinal Spellman had his priests scabbing in the cemetery strike. Haywood said he had organized that union, but did not know of the action of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. He had bought a copy from me as he went in, but I did not recognize him. When he came out of the building, he waved to me cheerfully and said, “Keep up the good work.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Living Off the Land</h3>
				<p>“It’s good to have you around; you give one confidence in life,” said the Old Pioneer when he saw me come home from work and gather my cap full of peas from our garden, and a bowl of mulberries for breakfast from the huge tree by the lateral. “You live off the land like an Indian,” he added. I replied that I never bought any canned goods, although at times my fare might seem monotonous to the glutton, who thought only of a variety and of out-of-season vegetables. After the peas came fine red tomatoes. Now there is corn, regular sweet corn, Hopi, and pop; Okra, a little of which goes a long way; and always onions and carrots. The chard is wilting in this hot weather, after being on hand since last November. This year, we surrounded some of the tomato vines with stakes and a small mesh wire, and these plants seem to be doing better than before. Bell and chili peppers are on hand now until frost, and eggplant will be my staple in about a month. These are difficult to start, but grow like weeds when they have passed a certain stage. We have five rows of watermelons. When I fasted last August and picketed the tax man, I kept thinking of watermelons. Banana and hubbard squash have established ownership of one end of the garden. The oven in my wood stove is no good, so often, when I come home from work, the Old pioneer has baked a squash for me. He has an electric stove, but claims that food tastes better with a wood fire, fragrant with desert mesquite.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Water</h3>
				<p>Because of the high price of cotton due to the war, every man and his brother are planting cotton. The local papers, and then <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Life</i> magazine, had articles about a community east of Mesa where a big cotton man from California rented desert land, put down big wells, and drew all the water from a small nearby community, so they had to have water hauled, as they had no money to drill a deeper well. We call this kind of man a suitcase farmer. He leases land, hires custom tillage and custom planting, and often sells his crop before it is matured, so that no matter what happens, he cannot lose. He lives in town generally, or perhaps, as in this case, comes carpetbagging from another state. And for us here in Arizona, a robber from California is the worst.</p>
				<p>Wells that have been here for fifty years are now drying up because of this increased use of water. If a resident farmer has no water, or the thousands of dollars it takes to drill or deepen a well, he sells or leases the land to the big company and moves to town, or becomes a farm laborer. This is just what has happened in Arizona, for according to the census in 1940, there were in round numbers 18,400 farms. In 1950: only 10,300, with more land in cultivation than in 1940.</p>
				<p>This last month three resident farmers for whom I work had to drill wells. Adding insult to injury, the big farmers who have already gotten their large wells have now petitioned the courts to halt all well drilling because of the scarcity of water. They have theirs, so to hell with the rest. This same Association can unite to hog all the water, but when the <abbr class="initialism">CIO</abbr> wanted to bargain with them in the packing sheds, they claimed they were only individual farmers, not an organization.</p>
				<p>Few wetbacks work in this section, but the big farmers generally hire Mexican nationals, for they are steady, sober workers, more so than the average. As I remember my cotton picking days among the poverty-stricken and debilitated whites and poor and happy Negroes, I cannot but remember “where wealth accumulates and men decay.”</p>
				<p>In the latter part of June, fires burn in the fields all around: wheat and barley stubble. These shiftless farmers spoil their own land in this alkali country by these fires, and deprive the land of humus which results from the plowing under of the stubble. The land also soaks up more water and needs less irrigating where there is this mixture of soil and straw. The big company and the army captain farmer, James Hussey, are about the only ones around here who do not burn their stubble. The Old Pioneer rents his land to the big company, and won’t allow his stubble to be burned.</p>
				<p>“You shovel like a Mexican,” said the Old Pioneer, as he watched me make a check to dam up the water on the low side of a land in his small wheat field. After eight years in this Southwest, I finally have received this compliment. This Irishman generally dug his shovel deep into the ground, put his foot on it and leaned on it, thus making a hole where water could settle and cause a washout⁠—at the worst⁠—and at the best it would make rough ground for machinery that had to go over it. The right way⁠—the Mexican way⁠—is to scoop up dirt in a swinging motion. This is harder, but it leaves no hole for a washout.</p>
				<p><i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> readers might think that I do nothing but picket. “Hopi,” “picket,” and “fast” are three different words, but to my employers they seem somewhat interchangeable, for when I mention one, they ask about the other. They all read the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, and none of them are Catholics. The truth is, I have worked every day except the eight days I picketed in 1950, the time spent for the trip to Washington, and the three trips to the Hopi.</p>
				<p>There has been very little rain this last year. One cloudy evening, James came and got me to come and irrigate his barley field, which had recently been planted. Instead of being in lands about thirty feet wide, there were about 48 rows irrigated at a time. The water was already set and running in these rows. Bits of straw, sod, or tin kept those rows immediately in front of the entrance of the water from washing out, or giving these rows more than their share. Water from a port in the main ditch ran in a small ditch for about 12 feet, and then spread out in 12 rows. After a time, I walked down the quarter mile length of the field, stopping about every 100 feet to see if Brother Gopher had piled up a mound of fine dirt and had stopped the water in any certain row. Now, it commenced to rain. I had brought a raincoat, but with my slushing around in the mud and wielding the shovel and a flashlight, I was soon wet around the edges. I had run the pickup nearby, so I could get in and out of the rain for a few minutes. When one row would be finished I would remember its number and cut off the water. At the far end, water would back up and fill all of the rows. At times, I would shut off one port and open a new one. When daylight came, I was able to find portions of a few rows that had been missed, and to run water down these rows. It had rained most of the night, but not enough to provide moisture to germinate the barley.</p>
				<p>Now, about six weeks later, I irrigated this field at night. I crawled into my sleeping bag for a few minutes, and soon felt something cold touch my face. It was Cindy James’ dog, from half a mile away. She gravely held out her paw to be welcomed. I was only glad she had not brought her eight puppies along. I had made no noise in the field, but she knew I was there, it seemed. Irrigation went without much trouble, although I was busy most of the time.</p>
				<p>It is evening, and I see two Mexicans irrigating perhaps 200 rows of cantaloupes for the Big Company. They had irrigated last week when the seeds were first planted. Now a small amount of water runs down each row for about 36 hours, until it has subbed up and kept the seeds wet in this hot country. (I had not run the water long enough, so had to replant my tomato seeds.)</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Irrigating</h3>
				<p>I have been irrigating freshly plowed ground now for three nights, for James. He is a reserve officer, and is all packed up to go to camp tomorrow. He believed in the previous war, but sees no sense in the farce in Korea. As he is not a convinced pacifist, there is little he can do about it. Now the next day, when he called for me to irrigate, he joyfully informed me that the discharge he had asked for long ago had just arrived, and he would not have to go to Korea. He is the most considerate employer I have ever had, and has more patience with inefficient help (including myself at times) than I as a pacifist would have had. Instead of driving those who work for him, he quietly suggests the tasks that are to be done, and we all go at our own speed. Last week, I cut tall Johnson grass along the irrigating ditches for him. Mexicans had taken the two handles off the scythe and thrown them away. I blistered my hands and creaked my back working in the (for me) unnatural posture required to manipulate this scythe. The second day, I borrowed one from the Old Pioneer that had handles, and got along nicely. These few days were not as hot as usual, so the work was strenuous, but not tiresome.</p>
				<p>That kind of labor is a good way of telling whether you are a man or a mouse. Tolstoy, at my age, 58, swung the cradle along with his peasants and ate their vegetarian diet. Some of his best works were written while he did this heavy labor.</p>
				<p>One thing to remember while irrigating is not to scatter the water. About 50 rows of maize were irrigated at one time. Some rows would be finished ahead of others, so water from one or more rows would be changed over into a dry row, and irrigation would proceed twice as fast. I have my same sleeping bag. When water has started down rows or lands, it takes a couple of hours to see where it is missing. This is the time to sleep. Dozing with head on knees is not restful. I am a light sleeper, and generally take the clock along to gauge the time. In irrigating plowed lands, the water has a tendency to flow on one side or the other, and you are never sure just where, until it gets going. To wade boot deep in mud which nearly pulls your boots off when you make each step, and to make a check that will deflect the water, is quite a chore. Always slant the check in the way you want the water to flow⁠—not straight across.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Meet George Yamada</h3>
				<p>George Yamada, Japanese <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr> who did time in Civilian Public Service and in Danbury Penitentiary, visited me for a week. Aside from Scott Nearing, and my friend Max Heinegg of New Zealand, George is the only vegetarian I have met who is a good worker. Likely, this is because he is Japanese, and not because he is a vegetarian. George cleaned ditches ten hours a day that week. He kidded and said it was not such hard work for him, because he did not have far to stoop, as he was built close to the ground.</p>
				<p>George had a print shop on the Coast, but gave it up rather than pay income taxes for war. He is an expert linotype operator, but will not take the excellent pay this occupation gives, for a withholding tax for war is taken. He has been visiting the Hopi, and helping them plant corn. Never a harsh word of Hopi parents to their children, he reports. He feels that the Hopi represent a way of life that is an oasis in the world of gadgets. He did not mind my wood stove, oil lamp, and lack of an icebox or air conditioning, for the Hopi cannot afford these things either.</p>
				<p>A Legionnaire who is a friend of the Old Pioneer, and who says he knows me, told him that I was “crazy as hell, for there is no such thing as Christian Anarchism.” The Old Pioneer told him that he was not of my belief, and would not pretend to defend my ideas, but that a thought came to him that might throw some light on the subject. He told the Legionnaire that bluing added to water did not make the clothes blue, but made them white. It could be that anarchism, a vague or violent ideal as the case may be, and Christianity, which has not succeeded in following Christ, might be combined and produce something better than either anarchism without Christ or Christianity which follows the war-provoking state.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Babylon</h3>
				<p>The Valley National Bank, largest bank in the Rocky Mountain states, it boasts, writes of the growth of Phoenix. Along with the Chamber of Commerce and real estate sharks, there is the constant comparison with Los Angeles, and much fuss is made when an industry moves here. The following from the June, 1951, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Arizona Progress</i>, issued by the Valley Bank, entitled “Comes the Evolution,” is worth quoting in full:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>The age of Materialism, spawned by a fertile Individualism and the Industrial Revolution, has lasted a long time. It has produced a multitude of creature comforts. We have invented gadgets to perform almost every physical act, including that of procreation. But all this material progress has not solved the world’s social and political problems, nor contributed noticeably to human happiness or satisfaction. On the contrary, it seems only to have increased tension, insomnia, and ulcers.</p>
					<p>Man, apparently, cannot live by bread alone, or by caviar alone, or even by the escapism of modern transportation and entertainment. He has also had his fill of Supermen and Medicine Men, of puny panaceas and mortal miscalculations. The Pied Pipers of the Proletariat have not delivered a “more abundant life,” but continuous unrest and a long succession of gory wars. When disillusionment sets in, people usually become embittered fatalists or humble supplicants seeking divine guidance.</p>
					<p>Fatalism, of course, is a negative and not wholly reassuring philosophy. Most people must have a spiritual anchor⁠—a basic belief in something. If intangible, so much the better. Said Apostle Paul, “faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.” Communism is doomed to failure not only because it is bad economics but because it is a godless and soulless doctrine.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p><em>Thus speaks Mammon of the Desert</em>, the chief architect which has changed this valley from one of homesteads to commercial farming, which foreclosed on hardworking farmers in the Depression, cleverly admits that something might be wrong with affairs. The religious stuffed-shirt who writes this stuff is smart enough to know better, although he may have deluded himself into believing that he is sincere. By hinting that one should pray and that there is really something to religion he seeks to link the predatory traits of his bank with something Holy. “1% is usury <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Banker, and time belongs to God, not to bankers.”</p>
				<p>With further quoting of scripture he tries to put the blame for his own mercenary program’s failure to produce an abundant life upon the Communists, accusing them of wars and saying that they are doomed because they are “Godless and soulless.” Bankers, who are supreme among thieves, have the gall which goes with their bloodsucking business in calling others soulless and godless. At least the Communists do not use the name of God to justify their usury. Bankers should not groan about their ulcers and insomnia. They have it coming. They should remember that Jesus who turned the money changers out of the Temple, and who said that a rich man could seldom enter the Kingdom of Heaven; that Jesus who told of rich men devouring the portion of widows and orphans. They should think of the time to come, when their soulless adherence to money has drained this Valley of water, and their warmongering activities have brought destruction to the cities. Then their valued real estate will produce less than the semi-waste lands of the Hopi, who lay by two years of corn ahead.</p>
				<p>The city parasites are crying to a loan company when they miss two paydays. Until the day they die with their moneybags at hand, these bankers will not see the handwriting on the wall, which shows that it is they and their lay and clerical apologists who have been weighed in the balance, and found wanting. Big Business heads the Freedom Drive for more propaganda against Communism, while they will not allow a radical to speak or write, or allow freedom of books in libraries or schools which do not bolster up the status quo. Unlike Babylon and Nineveh, Phoenix may then again rise from the ashes of desolation, but if it does, it will be without a need of bankers and parasites. It will be at a time when each can have his own vine and fig tree, and live simply⁠—without ulcers and insomnia, and without Red Feather charity drives, loyalty oaths, and politicians.</p>
				<p>In a letter from Lloyd Danzeisen, one of those who fasted and picketed with us at Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr>, he says, “You are lucky and of course very wise to be a ‘one man revolution,’ for you do not have to discuss your action over and over again (with committees) but can swing into action.”</p>
				<p>Thus, I carry papers wherever I go, and when I see French soldiers, in training at Luke Field, on the bus, I do not have to belong to a Committee to Propagandize French Soldiers, but I explain that the founder of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> was a Frenchman, and give them <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Tax Fast and Picketing</h3>
				<p>There was no rush for me to write my leaflet for the picketing and fasting commencing on <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 6. However, as with all things of the Spirit, it is best to act when you feel like it, and not “quench the spirit,” as it says in the Bible. On July 4th, I sat down, and in five minutes had finished my leaflet. Later, Rik made some fine suggestions as to phraseology and paragraphing, but it seemed to “have come out of the blue,” for there was no argument between us as to substance, as formerly. It read:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<h4>We Have the Kind of World We Deserve<br/>What are We Doing to Deserve a Better One?</h4>
					<p>We have tried for centuries to make people good by law, by punishment, by war, and by exchanging politicians. We have failed.</p>
					<p>We really can’t change the world. We really can’t change other people! The best we can do is to start a few thinking here and there. The way to do this, if we are sincere, is to change ourselves! This is why I am picketing and fasting!</p>
					<p>I have been trying to change myself since I studied the Sermon on the Mount while in solitary confinement as a Conscientious Objector in Atlanta prison in 1918.</p>
					<p>This is why I quit a civil service job nine years ago and live a life of voluntary poverty.</p>
					<p>I work by the day for farmers, because no withholding tax is taken from my pay.</p>
					<p>This is why I owe $129 income tax this past year alone, and have openly refused to pay taxes which go for <em>war and the bomb</em> for these past eight years.</p>
					<p>I am fasting these six days as a penance for being part of the civilization that threw the Atom Bomb at Hiroshima just six years ago, and continues to make bombs … and wars.</p>
					<p>
						<em>Our neighbors, the traditional Hopi Indians of Arizona, have not had to change their way of life, for they have had the true way all along!</em>
					</p>
					<p>The white man has stolen their lands, “plowed under” their sheep and cattle, and now this conqueror has told them that the 13th day of August is the deadline when their time will be up to claim their rights to their tribal lands! The Hopi do not recognize the right of the white man to be both judge and jury, for they are a self-supporting sovereign people who have lived in Arizona for a thousand years without laws, courts, jails, or murders. They have never made a treaty with the United States.</p>
					<p>The Indian Bureau has bribed some Hopi and has made Tribal Council stooges of them.</p>
					<p>Missionaries who have upheld this wicked government have taught them the white man’s watered-down religion.</p>
					<p>The government has drafted Hopi to fight and die in faraway lands.</p>
					<p>All this is wrong and shameful, and we should have no part of it⁠—not even by paying our income taxes to support such fraud.</p>
					<h4>What Can We Do?</h4>
					<p>We can rely upon ourselves rather than upon the government … We can rely upon God rather than the dizzy plans of dizzy politicians … We can work for a living instead of being parasites … We can refuse to make munitions, to buy war bonds, to register for the draft, or to pay income taxes … Government bribes, medals, and subsidies are trash compared to the peace of mind, love of neighbor, and “Thy Kingdom Come” for which we pray … We sense the illusion of violence, but still cling to the illusion of wealth … We need not sow the wind and reap the whirlwind … We can begin to be men instead of pipsqueaks … The spirit of True Pioneers shall yet defeat the bureaucrats!</p>
					<p>Ammon <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Hennacy,<br/><abbr class="initialism">R.</abbr> 3, Box 227<br/>Phoenix, Arizona<br/>August 6 to 11, 1951</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>I approached this tenth stretch of picketing with absolutely no fear. Heretofore when I even thought, through the year, of picketing, my knees would feel weak, and likewise my stomach. In my mind I was very brave, but my body had not caught up with my mind. This year they were both sturdily in unison. I expect that this may be due not only to experience, but to my deeper study in recent months of the philosophy of Gandhi, and of the traditional Hopi, both of which emphasized the cumulative buildup of true thought and action into a powerful force, whether outsiders measure things that way or not. Someone has said that no good thought or action is ever lost.</p>
				<p>The night before we were to make the signs, George Yamada came over, and we discussed the content of the signs. When hiking over the country, I never did like to go over the same road twice, and likewise Rik did not like to make the signs the same as previously. So the rear of the big sign was in a black border, with the first three lines across the sign, and the last three given a different kind of emphasis by being in a small box beneath.</p>
				<p>I mailed out about 300 leaflets, first class postage, to every minister, priest, rabbi, Mormon, or Jehovah’s Witness leader in this community, writing each a personal note asking him to pray for the success of my picketing, if he could in conscience do so. I knew my <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> priest friends would do this without asking, and that, outside of several Rotary- and Legion-minded priests, they were all sympathetic with my efforts, whether they openly said so or not. I knew, also, that it might take many years for the non-Catholic clergy to get over the fact that I was connected with the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, although the leading Baptist minister here had mentioned my picketing in a sermon, after having been given a leaflet and <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> by me two years ago. I also mailed the leaflet over the country to many friends, and to heads of the Internal Revenue Department in Washington, and to all officials connected there with the Hopi or Indians.</p>
				<p>The week before I planned to picket, I wrote to the chief of police, asking for a permit to picket, and saying if I did not get it I would picket anyway. I also suggested that what I was doing was clearly subversive, but not more so than formerly, and he might check up with the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr> and Revenue department and see what the three groups wanted to do about my picketing; I also wrote to the tax office and <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr> and told them the same thing. I wrote to my two tax men personally, and sent them leaflets. Orthodox anarchists who like to hide in alleys, whisper in saloons about the great damage they will do to the capitalist, or get social security checks which are not due them, and think they have done something, do not like my Gandhian frankness in dealing with officialdom. The idea is, I am not “asking” the officials anything: I am “telling” them what I am going to do. I would begin this fast on a Sunday noon, and end it on a Saturday noon, as the tax office closes at Saturday noon. It is best not to fill up on solid foods the day before beginning a fast, but to gradually lessen your intake.</p>
				<p>Rik’s car was parked five short blocks from the post office, so on Monday morning, after praying for peace and wisdom at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s, and saying hello to my newspaper friends, I loaded my pockets with leaflets, took extra <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s under my arm, and my water bag with 1½ gallons of distilled water, and walked toward the post office. My old news vendor friend had gone, and a new unsympathetic one was at hand. I hung the water bag on a palm tree, and walked down the street. My first leaflet was given to a man who stopped and read it, and when I passed him again in turn, he said:</p>
				<p>“I belong to a group that does things like you do: Alcoholics Anonymous. My wife died three years ago, and although I had been a churchgoer for twenty years, it did not mean anything to me until then, when I prayed. Later I mixed drinks with my prayers, but the <abbr class="initialism">AA</abbr> fixed me up. You are right in not wanting to change the world by violence; the change has to come with each person first.” Thus one Irishman to another.</p>
				<p>There were not so many people on the streets in this 105 degree temperature as there were in March, but very few refused to take my leaflet. Only two people mildly asked if I was a Commie. I replied that I was a Christian Anarchist. Whether they knew what this was or not, they took a leaflet. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stuart, the head of the Revenue Department, chuckled at my “Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin” sign, which Rik had made in semi-Jewish lettering. The headlines on that morning told of the reorganization of the Revenue Department by Truman; the inference being that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stuart, along with others, had been found wanting, and had to go. He was a man of the old school, with a sense of humor, and had grinned at my former reference to a tax man being about as bad as a hangman.</p>
				<p>In the afternoon a friend gave me a copy of a United Press release of 325 words, which had just been sent over the country, telling of my picketing and fasting. The account was very fair, although it did not mention my emphasis on the Hopi. (I found out later that, the next night, the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">London Evening Star</i> had 13 lines about my picketing but the anarchist paper <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Freedom</i> in London, to whom I had sent an advance air mail copy of my leaflet, never mentioned my activity; neither did the leading pacifist journal, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Fellowship</i>, in this country.) I gave out 400 leaflets and 175 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s. I only gave the latter when people asked for them, or when they seemed especially interested.</p>
				<p><em>“That leaflet of yours is a masterpiece, but there is one thing that spoils it. It is not dignified to picket like this,”</em> said a well-dressed man to me kindly, on the second day of my picketing.</p>
				<p>“Stop and think a minute,” I replied. “How would you ever have read the leaflet if I had not handed it to you on the picket line? And how would the United Press have sent it over the country if I had left it at home in my desk, and never picketed?”</p>
				<p>The night before, Rik sat up very late sewing some striped goods into an apron, which had pockets for my folded leaflets, and into which I could put 100 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s. However, I found it impeded my walking, so I left it with my water bag under a tree. (In November of 1952, I was carrying extra luggage in this apron when I got on a bus at Ann Arbor, <abbr class="eoc postal">Mich.</abbr> Three young men immediately asked me where I got it. I told them, “in Phoenix,” but they would not believe me. It seems that exactly that kind of goods is what their uniforms, in prisons nearby, had consisted of, for some years. They had just been released. They kept looking back at me, and laughing. I gave them <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s to read, explaining that I had done a stretch myself.)</p>
				<p>Ten <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s and fifteen leaflets is all that I could handle without fumbling them. My fingers would get numb from holding the sign. First thing, I met three people who knew me, and who wanted to know about my experiences. One was the wife of a <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>. She was visiting in Arizona, and had been the first of the radical pacifists to visit the radical Hopi. As she was reading the <abbr class="initialism">U.P.</abbr> release I had given her, a cop called me and asked me why I was stopping people and giving them literature. I told him this was only to friends who were asking for it. He was good-natured enough about it, but suggested that I go to the police station with him. I told him I had been arrested five times before for the same thing, and released without charge, but he insisted that I accompany him. So, with all my paraphernalia, I got into the squad car.</p>
				<p>Every time, I get a new police captain to educate. This time it was Captain Farley. He seemed good-natured enough, and wanted to know what I was trying to do. I told him I had advised the chief of police all about it a week ago. I said that there was too much war and materialism in the world, and that some spirituality was needed to offset it. Finding that I did not belong to any group, he wondered how I thought I could do anything. He thought that anarchists were bomb-throwers and killers. I told him that the biggest bomb-thrower was the government, that a Democrat had killed Lincoln, a Republican had killed Garfield, and an Anarchist had killed McKinley, so the honors were even. He seemed worried how the world would get along without cops when the anarchists overturned the world. I advised him that nothing would happen that suddenly, that today most people behaved and did not need a cop; it was only the weak-minded ones they caught.</p>
				<p>He asked me what I did with my money if I didn’t pay taxes. I told him I gave my money to my daughters for an education, rather than to Chiang and Franco. He speculated on what my daughters would think of such an unorthodox fellow as I seemed to be. I replied that they had bought no war stamps during the war, and were coming to see me in a few weeks. That when they were asked this question by the War Resister’s League, when they were quite small, they answered:</p>
				<p>“We are very proud of our Daddy because he did not go to war and kill people, but we get tired of hearing him brag about it. And besides, we did not join the Brownies, because they are for war.”</p>
				<p>The Captain asked me how I got by without paying taxes for war, and I explained the matter to him in detail. He wondered what the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr> thought about me. I told him to call up and see. He spoke to Murphy, the head. I offered to leave the room while he talked, but he said to remain. He told Murphy he could find no way of stopping this anarchist from parading around the post office, and what did the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr> think about it. The <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr> didn’t give him any satisfaction, it seemed. He then called the tax office, and asked if there wasn’t some rule whereby they could arrest me. He got no satisfaction from them, so told me to go ahead and picket. I told him there was no hard feeling on my part, and offered to shake hands with him, but he felt insulted, or so he pretended. If he knew what I think of cops, he would know that I was really humble, for once, and tried to be decent to him.</p>
				<p>I went back to my picketing. At noon I heard that the <abbr class="initialism">U.P.</abbr> had interviewed the tax office as to my method of working and not paying taxes, and had sent an additional release over the wires. Later in the afternoon, the Hearst syndicate took my picture for the Los Angeles papers, using a rewrite of the <abbr class="initialism">U.P.</abbr> article. I met <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stuart, wife of the tax man, and she deplored my being arrested in a free country. She is a Democratic National Committee woman from Arizona. She was always kind and gracious each time she met me while I was picketing. As it happened last year, the second night of the fast is always the worst. I took a bath, and rested or slept until 6:30 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr>, and felt fine. I had my second wind. My eyes and head were clear. I gave out 300 leaflets and 70 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s.</p>
				<p>The next morning, my first customer was the head of the Associated Press Bureau in Phoenix, who had been requested by an out-of-town member to report on my activities. This client was told that the policy of the local papers (owned by one man in Indianapolis) was not to “dignify” my activities by mentioning them, although they had given me publicity in the past. Whether now this was because I was emphasizing evil which the white man was doing to the Indian, whether they did not like my poking fun at their stuffed shirt thievery of the bankers, or whether it was the mistaken idea that only wisdom could come from those who wore white collars, and not from one who digs ditches, pickets, and has no desires by which he can be bribed to shut up, I do not know. At least a favorable release was sent <abbr class="initialism">AP</abbr> over the state, featuring my Hopi sign, and telling of my nonpayment of taxes.</p>
				<p>Another cop stopped and questioned me. I told him they had all of my answers at headquarters, so he left. One of my employers drove up and asked me to rest in a nearby park for a few minutes. Many of the same people came and went, so I could not expect an increase in the number of leaflets handed out. However, dozens who had received the leaflet before stopped and asked for <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s. As before, Negroes, Mexicans, and Indians nearly always took my leaflets. A leading post office official greeted me cordially and asked for my propaganda, but the twopenny clerks for the most part had a “loyalty oath” consciousness, and were afraid to be seen casting a glance toward me, much less taking a leaflet.</p>
				<p>Service Club members marched down, four-abreast, from luncheon in the nearby Westward Ho, and glared at me. Invariably, the youngest of them would furtively ask for a leaflet. Only the Cadillac-mind seemed impervious to unorthodox ideas. Numerous mechanics in nearby garages, with the name “Cadillac” sewed on their coveralls, passed by sneeringly. Both of the tax men who had tried to get taxes from me during these years greeted me cordially, not deeming it a disgrace to do so among their fellow workers. Several people reported that my activities had been broadcast, by local radios at different times during the day, without any bias against me. They quoted my reply to a reporter—that while I might not change the world, I was sure it wouldn’t change me. I gave out 235 leaflets and 100 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s.</p>
				<p>That evening Rik and Ginny had invited Morris, a Hopi silversmith, and family over for supper. (I rode back and forth with Rik and stayed at his house during the week, for the 24 miles a day picketing was enough for me, without walking the four miles a day to my place at the Old Pioneer’s.) This Hopi had a relative who belonged to the Spirit Clan, and who fasted 16 days every year at a certain celebration. About an ounce of soup was all that was allowed each day⁠—no water. On the 15th day, this man went to the home of his mother and asked for a drink of water. They refused, and scolded him for being a weakling. All this time, those who fasted ran over the reservation in a search for spirits, or in making prayers at certain places. In fatigue and despair, this man entered the hollow where babies had been buried. The spirits of these babies would not let him go. There was a hole which opened out upon a steep cliff. He determined to jump out and commit suicide. Just before he came to the ground, after he had jumped, invisible arms seemed to hold him up, so that he landed without a scratch. This taught him a lesson, and made him ashamed of himself, so that for the succeeding three years he went through the 16-day fast with honor and without any pipsqueaking.</p>
				<p>That night I was not sleepy, so rested on a couch. No matter how the others in the room began a conversation, it ended about something to eat. I had to shout, and tell them to talk about something else. I received an air mail from Dorothy, telling of the picketing of the Atomic Energy Commission in <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> by the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> and others on Monday. My wob friend, Askew, in Seattle, had heard a report of my picketing on the radio there.</p>
				<p>First thing the next morning, as I was picketing, a man stopped and asked me what it was all about. I gave him a leaflet and <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. He asked if I had to pay too much income tax. I told him that I did not pay any tax at all. He asked me to repeat this assertion and said:</p>
				<p>“Why you pay no tax at all and I have to pay my tax. That isn’t fair!”</p>
				<p>“You don’t <em>have</em> to pay any tax unless you want to,” I replied.</p>
				<p>He became angry and went away muttering. Several men in uniform took my leaflets. It worried some people to learn that I belonged to no church, was not even a <abbr class="initialism">JW</abbr>, had nothing for them to join that would save them, but advocated that they change themselves. Several fundamentalists exchanged their tracts for my literature, saying that there would be no peace until Christ came, and that I was wasting my time. Rik came to see me at noon, as usual, and kidded me about my “Indian dinner.” The reference being to Indians who, when in the desert without food, simply drew up their belt a notch and did without, calling this operation an “Indian dinner.” Two friendly priests stopped and talked to me. Countless persons in cars stopped and told me to keep up my good spirit. Outside of that first day, no one had called me Commie. I gave out 235 leaflets and 159 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s.</p>
				<p>The next day, around noon, a friend from Tucson, who had visited me four years ago when I picketed the Freedom Train, came with Ed Morgan, a labor lawyer who was his friend. He had read in a Tucson paper that I had been arrested, and so drove up to see if there was anything that could be done. I needed a little rest, so we took half an hour off and drove to the ranch where George Yamada was working, and told him of the events of the week. Each time I fasted and picketed because of Hiroshima, I had sent my leaflets and an air mail to the Mayor of Hiroshima. This year George mailed the letter for me, with his own greeting in Japanese.</p>
				<p>When I was picketing a woman shouted from a car:</p>
				<p>“Did you just get nuts or have you always been that way?”</p>
				<p>“Lady, we all live in a crazy world,” I replied.</p>
				<p>About 25 cars would always be parked around the sidewalk as I picketed. If any of the people looked interested, I offered them a leaflet, and later I gave them a paper, if they seemed to read the leaflet with interest. Being naturally of a sociable nature, if I saw a car from Ohio or Wisconsin, I told the occupants that I was from those states, and thus, as Peter Maurin said, made my revolution more “personalist.” One man in a car, to whom I handed a leaflet, asked for a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> when I passed again, saying that he was a veteran and an Indian, and was sure glad to see my Hopi sign. He was a Cherokee.</p>
				<p>Driving homeward with Rik that night, I was very thirsty. As we were near the town of Tempe, Rik suggested that we stop in a drugstore there, and get some ice water. If you drink it slowly, when fasting, it will not hurt you. As we parked the car, we saw next to us the car with Number 1 license plates⁠—that of the Governor⁠—so I left a leaflet and marked copies of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> in it. Inside the drugstore I introduced myself to Governor Howard Pyle, and told him of my activities, and of the literature I had left for him to read. He said he felt he would gain some information from what I had left, and although he has the reputation of being all things to all men, it could be that some knowledge of the Hopi might counteract his advisors, who want the Indians to own land privately, and not communally, and to be taxed by the state. I gave out 210 leaflets and 100 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s that day.</p>
				<p>Now it was the last day of my picketing. I felt fine and thought, if it was necessary, I could fast another week. Working for farmers, I seldom take time to look in the small piece of glass I use for a mirror, but this morning, while shaving, I noticed how bright my eyes were. A woman asked me for extra leaflets and <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s, saying she would give them out to the women in her church club. I asked her what parish she attended. She said she was not a Catholic. She was a Presbyterian, and was going to subscribe to the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. Two young men, who had parked their car, came running and asked for literature, saying that they had seen my picture in the Los Angeles paper a few days before. I told them, as I had told others, that my message might seem strange to them, but they should take as much of it as they could understand. Saturday noon came, and as I prepared to cease my picketing, and was on the last round of my course, I gave my last leaflet and <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s to an Apache Indian and his wife, who just came out of the post office.</p>
				<p>Weighing myself on the same scales that I had used when I began the fast, I found that I had lost 17 pounds. This was much more than last year, when I had lost 11. I did not feel weak. I called up the <abbr class="initialism">U.P.</abbr> Bureau and told them that I had finished my fast. They said that the New York office had requested a feature story about my activity, and it would be broadcast soon, on a Sunday. I gave out 86 leaflets and 59 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s. A total of 1,320 leaflets and 563 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s during the week. About 300 people had stopped and greeted me kindly during the week; only three had spoken harsh words.</p>
				<p>When you fast, your stomach shrinks, and you cannot eat as much as you think you can. I drank some orange juice, tomato juice, and ate some grapes and peaches, and by 8 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> had mashed potatoes, soup, coffee, and a small piece of pie. When Ginny was dishing out the soup, I asked for three times as much as I could swallow. The next Monday, I worked ten hours, and in a couple of days had gained back all I had lost in weight. I felt fine.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Hopi Snake Dance</h3>
				<p>About two weeks after my fasting, Rik and family and I drove up, by way of the beautiful Salt River Canyon and Holbrook, to the Hopi Snake Dance. This year it was at Second Mesa. We visited the different villages, and Ginny was entranced with The Hopi Way of Life. She went to the store to get something, and told me that Ramon Hubbell, the trader who had blasphemed the Hopi, was there. They have stores in many places. So I went over and introduced myself. He was a fat, burly, elderly, man who remembered the letters I had written to him and the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s I had sent him. He patted his belly, and shouted that I was a failure like all radicals, that all I wanted was his money. Why didn’t I get a job and do some hard work for a change? His wife must have been used to his blustering, for she tried to quiet him a little, in order that I might have an opportunity to explain myself. He thought some Communists were hiding behind his store in World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, and seemed to think they were there yet. I told him that the two newspaper men and myself were anarchistic, which was the furthest removed from Communism that an idea could be, and that if he had been told we were Communists, and were subverting the Hopi, he was much mistaken. I tried to tell him Hopi history, but he did not want to hear it. I was quiet in tone, and we talked for an hour. Then Rik and Ginny came for us to go to the Snake Dance. As I got in one side of the car, Hubbell whispered to Ginny at the other side:</p>
				<p>“That Hennacy has too kind of a face to be an anarchist.” I suppose he was looking for horns.</p>
				<p>A group from the American Indian Congress were here talking to the radical Hopi. They wanted to take movies of Dan, but he would not allow it, for he felt that they would use his picture along with government propaganda. Seems the more educated anthropologists are, the less they know what is going on <em>today</em>. They may know all about the bones of the ancients, but they get so tangled up in their details that they miss the real life of the Hopi. Rik and family went back to Phoenix, and I went with relatives of the Hopi to Winslow, and then to Flagstaff to visit Piatt and Barbara Cline.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>I Love My Enemies, But Am Hell on My Friends</h3>
				<p>I receive hundreds of letters from over the world from readers of <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. Most of them praise my stand, but a few of them curse me roundly. I answer these letters in as kind a spirit as seems possible at the time. To those who partly agree, I tell them more of the same, and dare them to live nearer the ideal. If they are too weak to go further, then I do not need to be bothered answering them. If they mean business, then we have helped each other. I receive a few anonymous letters. One man signed his name, called me a phony, and in every assertion that he made about my activities and character he was as wrong as a person could be. I did not know if he was a Catholic, an <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr>, a parasite and exploiter, or just a disgruntled chance reader of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. I answered each false assertion of his in detail and in good humor, although with some sarcasm. In answer he apologized. Many times we do not know the intent of our efforts, so once in awhile it is good to know that you have overcome evil with goodwill.</p>
				<p>I often say that I love my enemies but am hell on my friends. And it has seemed that those with whom I have the most controversy are those who claim to accept the ideals of peace and brotherhood, and even at times anarchism, yet who follow from such a distance when it comes to practicing these ideals that I feel it is my duty, as one who goes a long way to call the bluff of those who say “Lord, Lord” and “peace, peace” in exultant tones which mean very little. To the old man who had “nary a mark of the beast,” I am humble, but not to those who boast of being humble. At times, those who do not want to have their inconsistencies pointed out, say in a super-sweet voice to me “judge not, lest ye be judged.” I reply “<abbr class="initialism">O.K.</abbr>, judge me then.”</p>
				<p>A woman had written to <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Fellowship</i>, the leading pacifist magazine in this country, whining because she might be rated as a “second class pacifist,” inasmuch as she still paid taxes. The reply of this pacifist group was that we all had to obey our conscience, and that we were all brothers in Peace. To a real pacifist or anarchist who has done time, or who has made a brave stand, but who, because of mitigating circumstances, could not take an out-and-out radical stand, I would never be critical. But Professional Pacifists who receive salaries as such, to water down the ideal, to keep an organization going, are another thing. Accordingly, I wrote the following letter to <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Fellowship</i> magazine, in August of 1951. Six months later, it was published by them without comment.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Editor, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Fellowship</i>:</p>
					<p>A lady writes to you of worrying because she might be called a “Second Class Pacifist.” We are all that kind compared to Gandhi, but that is no reason we should glory in it. We should be ashamed of our timidity in the face of rampant militarism. We are great at calling the Devil names and then we jump to the other extreme and infer that Heaven and World Government or World Citizenship are similar. No wonder we are so weak. We fail to come to grips with reality.</p>
					<p>When the organization gets to be more important than the ideal it is supposed to stand for then there is something seriously wrong. That is just what has happened to the churches and the unions and now to the <abbr class="initialism">FOR</abbr>.</p>
					<p>In every subject under consideration there is a norm, a standard, and a rule by which actions can be measured. But with the <abbr class="initialism">FOR</abbr> there is no norm. You can be an absolutist and refuse to pay taxes, buy bonds, do war work, register for the draft, and if in prison not cry for a parole. The bulk of the <abbr class="initialism">FOR</abbr> membership will blush because of your forthrightness. You can also load a gun but refuse to fire it and remain, not a second class, but a full rate pacifist. Nonsense! The <abbr class="initialism">FOR</abbr> says ten inches is a foot; Father Divine may say fourteen inches; the <abbr class="initialism">JW</abbr>s eight inches. A foot is a foot and a pacifist is a pacifist, and not half a pacifist.</p>
					<p>A person can say that there is a certain ideal but they do not have the courage to live up to it, or for the time being it is too inconvenient and that they will follow from afar off. That is too bad but not half as bad as having no ideal at all or alibiing that their temporary convenience is the ideal and that any makeshift is <abbr class="initialism">o.k.</abbr> as long as the dear old <abbr class="initialism">FOR</abbr> has plenty of members. All this is foolishness with God and man.</p>
					<p>Sincerely,<br/>Ammon <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Hennacy</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>I had not attended a Christian Science church for many years. I noticed a lecture advertised on the subject of Peace. I knew that the lecturer would talk the usual jargon about everything being spiritual, and that matter was not really existing, only a seeming existence. Nevertheless, I stood outside and quietly said, “Catholic Worker. Peace paper.” Two uniformed ushers came out and asked me to stop selling the paper. I pointed out to them that their church was the only one that did not allow its members to be <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>s, but I think I wasted my time talking to them. I only sold one paper to a fallen away Catholic whom I knew, and one of the ushers took a copy to read. I heard the lecture, which was as unreal when it came to discussing the subject of Peace as any lecture could be. I told one of the ushers who spoke to me later that, in the early thirties, when I was in Milwaukee, John Randall Dunn, the leading Christian Science lecturer and later editor of two of their metaphysical magazines, had asked me to stop and meet him at the Pfister Hotel, when he was there lecturing. He had written an excellent article against war, and I wrote and asked him if he meant it. This was his reply:</p>
				<p>After some conversation he put his arm around me and said, “You are right, and the Church is wrong, on the subject of war. You did right in going to prison. Keep in touch with me.” I wrote to him several times again, and did not get an answer, so with so many people who have a momentary flash of truth. The usher felt that people had to make a living even if they worked at war work, and they had to obey the law, even if it was a bad law.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
