<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 17</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter17" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 17</h2>
				<h3>Communities</h3>
				<h3>1921⁠–⁠1963</h3>
				<h3>All Over the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> and Canada</h3>
			</header>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Amish</h3>
				<p>The Amish are an offshoot of the Mennonites, from the 18th century in the Palatinate in Europe, led by Jacob Ammon. For over 150 years, they have developed the farm land in Pennsylvania, until it is the most valuable in the country. My friend Vincent Tortora, a Catholic who has written about the Amish, drove me through the Amish country here around Lancaster, <abbr class="postal">Pa.</abbr> where, over the rolling fields, I saw the Amish farmers plowing and harrowing with horses and mules. You knew the “House” Amish because they had windmills and no wires, or telephones, or electricity, and no tractors in the yard. They are so called because they have prayer meetings and services in their homes instead of in churches. The “Church” Amish have churches, and use tractors and automobiles, and perhaps have a telephone and electricity. Another name for the “House” Amish is “hook and eye” Amish, because they use no buttons and are very strict. Tradition says that in Germany, in the old days, the most conspicuous point of attire of a soldier was his brass buttons, so they used no buttons in protest. All these Amish vote and pay taxes, and mostly are allowed by the government to stay and work on their farms instead of going to war. To them, the outside world is called “gay,” as the Gypsies call the outside world, much as the Mormons call all others “Gentiles.” Their children are taught in parochial schools or in public one room schools where the teacher is sympathetic and all the children are Amish. Vincent took me to one such school where he knew the teacher and children. When I was introduced, the children looked at me attentively. I did not realize then, until I saw signs on billboards advertising companies with the name “Ammon,” that my first name stood me in good stead. I played some Hopi records and told them Indian stories. The girls in their blue dresses on one side of the room and the boys in their broad hats and long-cut hair on the other side listened with bright faces to my talk. Lunch time came, and the older girls crowded around Vincent, asking him to bat on their side in the ball game outside. He knocked a homer.</p>
				<p>There are 10,000 Amish in and around Lancaster. None of them need sign a note, for they are absolutely honest in business. Some put money in banks, but most of them do not. The Amish have very little heart trouble or tuberculosis. They do not carry insurance, and if a building burns, all the Amish get together and have a “bee,” and the new building is up in a few days. We passed “black-bumpers,” which are cars with the chrome painted over by the Amish, for otherwise they would be thought “gay.” The Amish do not live in town or carry on any business. Dairying and chicken-raising occupy them for long hours each day. Their land grows in value, for they use only natural manure from cattle and horses, and no commercial fertilizers, hence their land is never worn out, but grows deeper topsoil, as generation after generation of these old country Christians continue their culture in our atomic age. The Amish do not go to court in any circumstance. If any one steals from them, they do not report it to the police. Vincent told me of cases where outsiders had reported someone stealing from the Amish, and the judge had given them the limit “for stealing from these good people.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Hutterites</h3>
				<p>Professor Joseph Eaton was coauthor in the December 1953 <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Scientific American</i> of an article about the Hutterites in South Dakota, Montana, and Canada. These descendants of the Anabaptists in Transylvania had been tortured, robbed, and exiled by Catholic civil authorities and the clergy. (Their founder, Jacob Hutter, was burned at the stake in 1536.) Driven from town to forest, and given sanctuary now and then by some noble, they were driven out again and again. Many recanted, but in 1874, 102 families came to the Dakotas. They were persecuted because of their pacifism in World War <span class="z3998:roman">I</span>, and the Hofer brothers died in solitary in Alcatraz. I have corresponded with their family in Canada. These brothers were buried in the army uniforms which in life they had refused to wear.</p>
				<p>I had corresponded with Professor Eaton, and visited with him for an hour at Western Reserve University in Cleveland. He suggested that I visit the King Colony Ranch near Lewistown, Montana. I wrote to <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Joseph Stahl there, and his bearded son Joseph met me at the bus, in the midst of an unusual snow storm on April 30, 1954. He is the manager of this 7,000 acre ranch where 61 Hutterites live, all of them being related, so that, the young folks told me later, when they wanted to marry, they visited other Hutterite colonies where they had no relatives, and in a couple of weeks in August, there was some quick courting going on. There are three other ranches within thirty miles. <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Stahl greeted me kindly. He is an old man who, after illness two years ago, relinquished his position as minister of this community to a younger man who was just recently ordained by the religious head of the Hutterites, who lives in Canada. He knew of my pacifist history but, in a forthright manner, was disconcerted about three things: (1) Why I had waited until 59 years of age to be baptized a Catholic. (2) How I could be a Catholic as well as a pacifist, for the Church upheld war. (3) Why I did not live with my wife. I had given him a copy of my book, and showed him one about the Hopi, and also Dorothy’s book, and he remarked, “Did Jesus have any books?” And looking at the medal of <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis which I wore, he said, “And would Jesus wear a medal?” Nevertheless, he gave me a doctrinal book on Hutterite history and theology. His daughter, Mary, asked questions about the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, and other teenagers and men and women of the community came back and forth. The women dressed plainly, with polka-dot kerchiefs over their heads. The family, of this house of children and grandchildren, ate in the dining room, but I ate with <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Stahl in my alcove near his room, his wife having passed on five years ago. He folded his hands in a German blessing and thanked God after the meal. Services are held each day about 5 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr>, but there were none that day, as the Chapel was being painted. The meeting lasts for two hours on Sunday morning.</p>
				<p>During the evening, I was asked questions about Catholic faith and customs, and later, when the older folks had gone to bed, the teenagers showed me their hope chests, where all that they were allowed to own was placed. Once in a while, one would place a picture of a movie star on the inside of the lid, but this was very daring indeed. They freely discussed the outer world and their happy life within this community. They had met some sweet nuns at a hospital, but had read Maria Monk stories, and had much to learn. Statistics show that there is less mental disturbance and a higher birth rate among these folks than any other of record. They do not send mentally ill people to hospitals, but take care of them at home, which is the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> and anarchist ideal. I asked them about discipline in the community. They said that a certain boy had stolen a bicycle from a neighbor in the “outer-world” (my daughters of the I AM religion speak of the outside in this exact term also). He broke it trying to ride it, and he was paddled, and had to stand ashamed before all in Church. The community repaid the value of the stolen article in wheat. Later this boy enlisted in the army, and now writes back that he has learned to obey, and when he comes back, he will consider himself lucky, and will behave. If a person of adult age did evil, he confessed his sin before all in church, and if it was possible to undo the injury, he did so. A more serious crime⁠—where there was no repentance⁠—resulted in the person leaving the community. No cases were ever taken to an outside court. Seven boys from this community were in Civilian Public Service in World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, and none have been sent to date to alternative service in the draft which continues today. Some rabble-rousers, led by a military man from the city, tried to use <abbr class="initialism">KKK</abbr> tactics at the time of Pearl Harbor, but as the Hutterites have the respect of the community, this soon died down. There are 98 communities of the Hutterites, divided as follows in the 1954 Almanac shown to me: 7,264 in Alberta and Manitoba, having 88 ministers; 372 in South Dakota with 24 ministers, this number being included in the Montana groups who have 12 ministers. There are 472 in Paraguay with 7 ministers and 124 in England with 2 ministers. Each colony is on its own, although they may trade produce if they desire. This colony has 200 cows, 700 sheep, 2,000 chickens, and 20 hives of bees. No tobacco is used, but beer and wine is made, and is consumed by these German folks without drunkenness. No ornaments, musical instruments, radio, television, dancing, or going to movies are permitted. No photographs are ever taken.</p>
				<p>These folks do not like being called Mennonites, for they are Hutterites. <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Stahl read to me from Acts, telling about obedience to authorities and the payment of taxes to Caesar. Here they pay $5,000 local taxes for roads and schools, and some federal income tax. They liked my idea of simple life on the land and did not mind my vegetarianism, admitting that they ate too much meat. They are not out to disturb and convert the world, as are the Doukhobors, and told me that I would make a good Hutterite; but I felt that while it was wonderful to visit these good folks, their atmosphere was too puritanical for me.</p>
				<p>When a young man is married, he then grows a beard, and he gets a bed, 25 pounds of feathers to make quilts, a bureau, a spinning wheel, and a sewing machine. With more children, they get more rooms. There is no honeymoon. Each farmer is allowed a dollar a month to spend if he has to go to town for anything. As they buy wholesale, many of the local merchants do not get Hutterite trade, and so restrictive laws as to their expansion have been passed in South Dakota and Manitoba.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Doukhobors</h3>
				<p>I have visited these anarchistic pacifists four times in the past 19 years. They broke off from the Greek Orthodox Church in Russia about 300 years ago.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“Each priest argued that the Holy Spirit was in favor of his own way of making the sign of the Cross,” Peter, their leader, continued. “I rose from behind the trees where I had been sitting. ‘You are both wrong,’ I told them. ‘The Holy Spirit is not concerned whether you make the sign of the Cross with two fingers, three fingers, or with all fingers of both hands. And if you priests had enough of the Holy Spirit within, you would not be squabbling over such foolish things.’</p>
					<p>“ ‘Oh,’ said the Governor, baring his teeth at me like an angry dog, ‘You are wrestling with the Holy Spirit, eh?’ <em>You are a spirit wrestler; a Doukhobor;</em> tie him to the post and whip him across his back.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>This quotation is from <abbr class="name">F.C.</abbr> Wright’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication">Slava Bohu</i> (Praise God), a story of the Doukhobors published in 1941 by Farrar, Rinehart. I have corresponded with him in Vancouver, where he is a newspaper man.</p>
				<p>As a Tolstoian, I had read of these 7,000 Christian Anarchists coming from concentration camps and the wilderness of Russia to Saskatchewan in 1889. Tolstoy’s royalties from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Resurrection</i>, with money from the English Quakers, provided their transportation. After seven years of homesteading, they were asked to swear allegiance to the king, but as they did not believe in king or czar they refused and gave up their land, and moved to British Columbia, 150 miles north of Spokane, where they bought land. Alexis Carrel in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Man, the Unknown</i>, says of them: “The Doukhobors of Canada have demonstrated that those whose will is strong can secure complete independence, even in the midst of modern civilization. I know with them that: ‘Christ said turn the other cheek. Some among humanity must begin, must set an example. Our ancestors did not give way to the Cossacks. We will lead the way, will suffer for our principles come what may.’ ”</p>
				<p>Tradition says that the Doukhobors come from the Three Hebrew Children of the fiery furnace. In 1893, at the village of Kars, in Russia, they had received word from their leader, who was in prison in Siberia, that they should reform their lives and burn all guns, knives, ikons, tobacco pouches, vodka containers, and that there should be no more division of rich and poor among them. When they built this fire, Cossacks beat them with knouts and trod them with their horses.</p>
				<p>In 1954, in upper California, I met aged Fred Sorokoff, who at the age of 12 had witnessed this terrible scene. His son had been in prison as a conscientious objector in World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.</p>
				<p>They burned schoolhouses rather than send their children there to be taught militarism. They took off their clothes in court, as much as to say, “You have taken our land, our children, because we would not send them to your schools, now take our clothes, take everything.” <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis divested himself of his clothing in the public square at Assisi rather than be a part of the commercialism of his wealthy father. George Fox went naked in the streets of London; so it is an old tradition. In 1941, I met Peter and Lucy Maloff, and later Helen Demoskoff, who was my interpreter as I spoke at Krestova, where a score of men and women stood naked after a vegetarian meal, singing their religious songs. Helen had been in jail for 11 years, off and on, for going naked in court, refusing to send her children to school, and for burning down community property which the government had confiscated and turned over to other Doukhobors whom they could train, more or less, in Canadian ways. Helen also burned her own house for good measure. Dorothy has also visited Helen, and looks upon her as a sister. After thirteen years, I visited the Doukhobors again, and was pleased to see the calmness of her grey eyes, the lucidity and spirituality of her conversation, and the warmth of her love, which the hounds of the government could not lessen. The government had taken hundreds of Doukhobor children and kept them for five years in the New Denver Sanitorium to brainwash them into patriotic ideas. The Quakers had sent a certain Emmet Gulley from Portland to help the Doukhobors, and he gradually turned into a persecutor of them, and worked hand in hand with the government. I reported this to the Quakers in Philadelphia and Pasadena several times, until they finally removed him. In fact, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Vancouver Sun</i> had a cartoon of a Quaker kidnapping a Doukhobor child and turning it over to the Mounties. Bloodhounds were used in some cases. Now, after my fourth visit in 1960, I find that a compromise has been reached, and all children are returned to their homes, no patriotic history is taught in the schools, there is no homework, and girls are allowed to wear the traditional Russian blouses and skirts. But recently, a teacher asked children who had been brainwashed for five years what they wanted to be when they grew up, and two boys answered that they wanted to be policemen. So it was about time that they came home, where the parents could counteract some of the devilishness taught in the schools.</p>
				<p>The Doukhobors are divided in five factions. The great majority live in Saskatchewan and are on big farms, and have for the most part succumbed to Canadian ways⁠—voting, eating meat, no communal life, smoking, drinking⁠—but they are legally recognized as pacifists, and do not have to go to war. They support the Red Cross instead.</p>
				<p>The Orthodox, led by Johnny Verigin, nephew of Peter the Lordly Verigin, who sent the message from Siberia in 1895, lives in Brilliant, and there are a great number of others around Grand Forks, to the west, who are still pacifists and live fairly simply, but who are tired out, and have finished with community living and with any opposition to the government. They meet in prayer and singing and keep up many traditions, and for the most part accept old age pensions.</p>
				<p>The prophet Sorokin came here, but some years ago migrated to South America, and did not come back. He has some followers, of varying adherence to Doukhobor ideals, who await his leadership.</p>
				<p>The Reformed Spiritual Community of Christ, some of whose members may also follow Sorokin, and who in the past burned down schoolhouses, went naked in court, and refused to send their children to school. Some of them live in a sort of communal group in Krestova. They have not promised to cease their violent tactics, and as I drove toward Nelson recently, at night, police were stopping all cars to see if any Doukhobor was up to mischief; and a guard is at certain bridges and schoolhouses all night.</p>
				<p>The Lebedof Faction is a smaller group, to which Helen belongs. They have formerly burnt houses and gone naked in court, and they feel that they have already established this witness, and the time is now ripe to emphasize more positive aspects of Doukhobor tradition, such as in the old time, and a refusal to accept pensions from the government.</p>
				<p>There was also a very small group under the leadership of Michael Verigin, now deceased, where communal living and communal marriage was practiced, at Hillyers, <abbr class="postal">B.C.</abbr>, near Vancouver. One child was born there, and was given the name of the mother, as it was impossible to tell who was the father. Helen’s brother, Joe Podvinikoff, was one of the leaders. This group has now disbanded.</p>
				<p>There is much animosity between all of these groups, much high-sounding intellectual hairsplitting, each accusing the other of not being a good Doukhobor, when in fact there are some in each group who do smoke, drink, eat meat, or vote, and there are some in each group who fall away from one or more of these Doukhobor ideals.</p>
				<p>In my 1960 visit, I got acquainted with Helen’s husband Pete, and her brother Pete, who had both done time in prison. Her brother Philip, nearby, has a small flour mill where wheat is stoneground. Unlike the Hutterites and some other communities, the Doukhobors have not succumbed to white bread. Helen made some wonderful pancakes, and her husband warmed up a steam-bath, where you sit on a table with feet on a bench, midst steam made from dashing hot water on hot stones, and wash yourself with hot and cold water, and finish off with a switch of tree branches.</p>
				<p>The Canadian government negotiated with the Russian government to move the Doukhobors back to Russia, and Helen’s brother Joe was on a committee that went to Russia to see about it. They signed away their Canadian citizenship, to take effect when they were on a boat going to Russia. Helen and about 50 others do not consider themselves the citizens of any government, so they are now free, it would seem. But negotiations have bogged down, and nothing has come of this removal.</p>
				<p>I went with Helen to Nelson, <abbr class="postal">B.C.</abbr>, and we visited the newspaper office; and in a few days a picture of us appeared saying “Anarchist Visitor … with Helen Demoskoff, member of the Sons of Freedom … an admirer of the Doukhobors ‘because they have been in jail so often in defense of their beliefs.’ ” My last evening, this time with the Doukhobors, was spent in hearing about thirty of their youth practice songs, at Pete Maloff <abbr>Jr.</abbr>’s house. I was asked to speak to them, and I only wished that they lived in the United States, for then I could teach in their home schools, and rest up between jails with these wonderful comrades; but I could only stay in Canada a short time without being deported as a subversive. I plan to visit the Doukhobors soon, in Saskatoon.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Molokons</h3>
				<p>Molokon means “Milk Drinker.” This name was given to them in Russia by the Orthodox because they were dissidents from the regular church, led communal lives, and were pacifists.</p>
				<p>Thousands of them came to Arizona and central California at the turn of the century. Each family had a quarter of an acre strip of land for their home and cow, chickens, <abbr>etc.</abbr> and all farmed in common. Any extra money earned outside was turned over to the local Molokon preacher. In 1917 in Phoenix about fifteen Molokons went to federal court for refusal to register for the draft. One of them was David, who worked for the Old Pioneer with whom I lived in the late forties. In court the Molokons wanted to sing and pray, but the Old Pioneer told them this was not allowed, but spoke to the Judge about it, and of course the Judge had to uphold the dignity of the court. The Old Pioneer told the Judge, “you had better let them sing for they will do it anyway.” So they sang and prayed. They all got time for opposing the war.</p>
				<p>Later David’s wife Stella said that it was not fair for her and her husband, who worked hard, and had no children, to turn their money over to the Molokon preacher. “The serpent has entered the garden,” the Old Pioneer said. And sure enough, in a few years all this communal life was abandoned, and now Molokons have big cars, get drunk, and in 1952 I was asked by two young Molokons down the lateral to go to court with them, as their brother was up for being against the war. He had registered but the authorities did not want to defer him. Now there was no singing and praying. About the same time, David and Stella revisited the Old Pioneer. Now, he is a wealthy Molokon preacher, and there is no radical talk. One Sunday, I went down the road, several miles, to the Molokon Church. Not many young folks were there. The men sat around a table on benches, and the women sat in the back of the room on benches. They have no musical instruments, but do a lot of singing in Russian. As each one enters the church, all present get up and bow. There is a short sermon, and all kneel on the floor and pray. When this is finished, each man kisses all the other men, and each woman bows before each man, and he, in a stately manner, puts his arm around her and kisses her. Then each woman kisses all of the other women. The preacher here is a farmer, who gets no salary. He hears confession, but it is not obligatory. There is no collection, but anyone can place money on the table for the poor if he likes, but I never saw any poor Doukhobors around Phoenix. They keep the Jewish holy days too, and do not eat pork or lard, and at certain times the the preacher blesses the crops in the fields. Dorothy and I have visited some of the old-timers who were in jail in 1917, and whenever I go to Phoenix, I always visit them. In August, many Molokons visit in California who are equally prosperous. Many of them are friends of some of the Doukhobors in Canada.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Single Tax</h3>
				<p>Arden, Delaware and Fairhope, Alabama were started in the 1890s as Single Tax colonies. At the former, Upton Sinclair lived. An obnoxious anarchist shoemaker had him arrested under the old blue laws for playing tennis on Sunday, and he left. My wife and I spent a week there in 1920, visiting its founder Frank Stephens, and Don Stephens, who was a conscientious objector in World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. Those who lived there were artists, or retired people, or bourgeois radicals who made a living in town. The intellectual atmosphere was better than most places. It was not intended to be the center of any revolution, only that in the matter of land there was not any exploitation. Profit and banking were not disturbed. As related in the first part of this book, my wife and I lived for six months in 1924 in Fairhope, where I taught in the progressive school there. I have made two visits, since that, time to Fairhope. It is growing in population and is surrounded by real estate speculative land, but the Single Tax idea is practiced as of old. I stayed at the home of the secretary of the Single Tax Corporation, Cornie Gaston, and he explained the idea to me. Tolstoy and other anarchists were friendly to the arguments of Single Tax, but as in practice a government is sanctioned, I am not interested in it. Fels of Fels-Napha and Lincoln of Lincoln Electric <abbr>Co.</abbr> have left millions for Single Tax propaganda but it seems that no one is enthusiastic enough to work overtime or to sweat, let alone die, for the cause, so it progresses not even as much as we poor anarchists. I quote from the Single Tax leaflet: “Under the Single Tax the government, not the land holder, is entitled to that portion that is now paid to the so-called ‘owners’ of land, as rent. Ownership is a term that can be properly applied only to those things that come into existence as a result of man’s labor applied to land. Land, by its nature, and by reason of man’s necessity to use it must be treated as common property so far as rent is concerned, if justice is to prevail … Since much of that which results from man’s labor on the land cannot be separated from the land upon which it is produced, it follows, that to have for himself the full ownership of that which he has produced, he must have exclusive title to the land involved in the production. To prevent such exclusive title from constituting a denial of the equal rights of all others, the single tax requires the holder of such title to pay into a common fund, for the equal benefit of all, an annual rent (single tax) equal to the value of the special privilege of exclusive title to the land. This value … is measured by the market value set by those who want land to use at its fullest productive capacity. This makes it unprofitable to hold land out of use or for inferior uses.”</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Llano Colony</h3>
				<p>This was started near Leesville, <abbr class="postal">La.</abbr>, around 1912, by Job Harriman, Socialist leader, who was defeated for mayor of Los Angeles because of the McNamara brothers’ confession of dynamiting the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Times</i> building. My wife and I spent a couple of weeks in the colony in 1922. They wanted us to stop and teach in their school, but we still wanted to hike over the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr>, and we did not like the dictatorship of Pickett, who was the manager. We met Kate Richards O’Hare and her family, there, and Bill Zeuch. The plan was for radicals to gather in this utopia where they would cooperate and not be exploited. The price of admission was $2,000. Old cut-over land had been bought cheaply and somehow, instead of cultivating and building homes on the land they had, they bought more and more land, and also some on the Isle of Pines, to grow tropical fruit. They had a good bakery and dairy, with milk and bread routes toward Leesville. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Llano Colonist</i> was a well written paper with a growing circulation. When we were there, they were filling the silo. Last year there were dozens of trucks with silage, and only a couple of people to tramp it in the silo. This year, there were half a dozen to do the tramping, but only a truck coming in now and then. The manager did not want to thin carrots, for that would be wasteful, so we had thin, spindly and crooked carrots. Now anyone could come, if they only had two mules and 10 children. The old timers were leaving and the newcomers were loafing. In religion, no one agreed on anything. The only thing all agreed on was that they did not like capitalism. My brother Paul roasted the peanuts, ground them into peanut butter, and packed it in cans or glass for sale. He was there for ten months, and got tired of the continual quarreling among the leaders. New folks came and the older ones left until, around 1936, it was dissolved. Pickett hung on until around 1957 on an acre or two. There is some committee in Los Angeles that claims some of the assets. Llano was bound to fail for the same reason that others failed, such as the New Harmony colony of Robert Owen, the Phalanges in Wisconsin of the Fourierites, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>: because these colonies were made up of people who came to escape life, with very little ability to work, and very little desire. What they wanted was a hand out. They could have been held together by some religion, perhaps, but they had different religions, or none.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Bruderhof</h3>
				<p>They began in Germany after World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, had to go to England when Hitler came into power, and then migrated to the wilds of Paraguay. With their German efficiency, they cleared the wilderness, built a hospital, and provided for themselves, however, they hired natives to do unskilled work. They were pacifist, but decidedly not anarchist or vegetarian. Later they established a group at Rifton, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr>, where they manufactured wooden toys. Anyone can join, but they are looked over by The Servants of the Word, a self-perpetuating group who pray and are led by God to do the right thing. Everyone has to think alike and there is no deviation from the norm. You cannot wear whiskers if that is the line, you cannot travel unless you get permission, you cannot write anything for publication unless it is <abbr class="initialism eoc">o.k.</abbr> A young fellow could not court a girl unless the Servants of the Word felt it was best. When Vivian Cherry took pictures of our Newburgh farm for Jubilee in 1955, we stopped at the Bruderhof at noon. I knew some folks there who were vegetarians, and suggested that I eat at the vegetarian table with them. “Oh, we are not vegetarians any more: we have achieved unity.” This is another name for brainwashing. There are folks who have been pushed around in life, and they turn over their worldly goods to the Bruderhof, and have security. If they like it, then it is the place for them. If they can change their ideas and habits to suit the Servants of the Word and think they are doing God’s will, then they are happy. I do not know what the rate of turnover is here. A few years later, I was visiting the Macedonia Colony for the second time. The Bruderhof was just in the process of liquidating it and selling out, moving the members either to another colony in Pennsylvania or the one in Connecticut. I asked the son of the founder, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Arnold, if a Catholic could be a Bruderhof. He said: “You could come here and live, and we would search for the truth. There is just one truth, not two.” And of course that would be the Bruderhof. It is therefore no place for an anarchist, but for those who do not mind being regulated and ordered around, it is fine. It is also a haven for tired radicals, or those who do not wish to oppose the system. To say that they are demonstrating anything about a future society is foolish: what they are doing is to provide a haven for those who are tired of fighting and who want to feel secure. (Dorothy Day does not agree with my ideas. She likes both the society of Brothers and Hutterites, and points out that their rule is voluntarily accepted.) I have friends in the Bruderhof in Paraguay and in England, as well as in this country, but they, as a whole, are too organized and medical-minded to suit me. But they don’t have to please me: there are plenty of people who will appreciate them.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Koinonia Community</h3>
				<p>This group is not far from the site of the old Andersonville Prison of Civil War time. It is near Americus, <abbr class="postal">Ga.</abbr> and is comprised of 1,100 acres of fairly good farm land where cotton, peanuts, pecans, <abbr>etc.</abbr> are grown. Two Baptist ministers started it around twenty years ago with the understanding that colored and white folks could live together. The ministers were put out of the Baptist Church, and they continued to be a source of cheer to the poor Negroes around there. After the Supreme Court decision, the White Citizen’s Councils got excited and bombed the road stand where the colony sold hams and other produce. They also shot at random with rifles at night through the windows of the houses, cut down thousands of young trees, and raised a lot of terror, until finally, no Negro would live on the premises. Any neighbor who would deal with the colony, or any store, or even a bank, who would deal with them was also bombed. They had to go 50 miles to buy feed or gasoline, and of course, they could not sell any produce. Even the insurance company canceled their insurance. So they bought pecan-shelling machinery, and made a living shipping the non-perishable nuts. Friends took up the slack of the insurance so that, in effect, they are insured. Members were beaten up in Americus, and brought to court on false charges and fined. An effort was made in the legislature to make them illegal. But Clarence Jordon, their leader, remained adamant; he would not run away. Three of us from the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> have been down there on night watch, and Dorothy had bullets sprayed around her, but no one was hurt. The few days I was there, there was no shooting. I worked in the shed packing pecans. While these folks are Baptists, they do not shove their religion at you the way some colonies do. Of course, people come and go for various reasons. They are pacifists, but not anarchists or vegetarians. I have no criticism of Koinonia, and would enjoy another visit.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3><abbr>St.</abbr> Francis Acres, Glen Gardner, <abbr class="postal">N.J.</abbr></h3>
				<p>This 17-acre wooded community was founded around 15 years ago by the man whom I consider the best fellow I know, David Dellinger. He had been in prison as a conscientious objector, and bought this land and established a printing press, bringing young pacifists and their wives to establish the new life. But the women wanted the pretty things in town, and both men and women wanted other spouses, and soon they all left, but others came and left, and now others came and stayed. As it happens, all but one, besides Dave and his sons, are now Catholics. They have a common purse, and democratic meetings as to how to run the colony, but the trouble is that very few people there are responsible workers, except Dave. I lived there for five months while the first edition of my book was being printed. If people are all of one religion, it is possible for them to live together in harmony, but this is not the case at Glen Gardner. If, after living in a community for many years, the common pocketbook idea is found among people who know each other, that is fine; but to begin with that impediment among people who come there because they can’t make it on the outside, does not make for a growing, successful community.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Amana Society</h3>
				<p>These pacifist Germans lived in community in Iowa much like the Hutterites, having a blacksmith shop, some small industries, a brewery, and farms. Around 1942, they ceased their community living and divided the industries into shares, like capitalistic organizations, and all now own their farms. I stopped there when hiking in 1946, but could not get any interest in pacifist ideas from anyone I spoke to. The older ones did not understand English, and the younger ones, I suppose, were now sold on The American Way of Life. Now, the “Amana refrigerator” is widely advertised.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Celo Community</h3>
				<p>I visited this beautiful valley among the North Carolina mountains in 1950, when the Hopi, Joe Craigmyle, and I were on our way to Washington, <abbr class="postal eoc">D.C.</abbr> Each one has five or ten acres and owns it outright, but there is a provision that he cannot sell it to anyone who is not approved by the community as a whole. There is a Quaker hospital nearby, where some of the colonists work. I had corresponded with one of the first conscientious objectors, Arle Brooks, and wanted to see him here, but he was miles away chopping wood, so I visited his wife Tillie, as related previously. Some old folks have come here to retire, and while the tone of the community is pacifist, it seems to be a resting place, rather than one which is alive. As I understand it, no Negroes live here; whether this is planned that way I do not know, but they do not have any racial trouble. It would be too quiet and too medical for me, but for some it would be, and is, the good life.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Macedonia Community</h3>
				<p>As mentioned before, this group was liquidated by the Bruderhof. I had visited it in 1950 and knew most of its members. They had a notation of the amount (not their name) on the score board, so that it would be known when the barrel was empty. They had a fine dairy and a milk route in town. They also made wooden toys, and raised vegetables and had a small school. There was a great variety of religious beliefs here, and continual turnover, as some were very pious, and others atheistic. They were all pacifists. The community was bound to fail because of this controversy on religion. The Bruderhof was the answer, for now they could all believe the same, with exception of a few who did not go with the Bruderhof.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Meadowlark, Newton, Kansas</h3>
				<p>When I spoke to the college of the Brethren in Newton, I went out to Selma Platt’s place, called “Meadowlark.” Here she took care of mentally ill people, for free and also for pay. She had enough land surrounding the main house for cottages for others, and some came from the defunct Macedonia Community. The spirit was cordial, well organized, and more of a venture than a real community. There was no religious basis upon which it could be founded. It could function as a helping hand. The people there tended to be liberal rather than radical.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Gould Farm</h3>
				<p>This large farm began half a century ago as a rest home in the Berkshires, near Great Barrington, Massachusetts, where mentally disturbed people came for rest and received treatment from specialists in the nearby town. Some of them could pay, and others couldn’t. There is a Protestant religious atmosphere, with chapel and evening meetings, but it is not forced upon the members of the community. There are a dozen small cottages where those who need privacy can have it. I attended a convention of social workers there and gave the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> radical philosophy. Later, I was invited again, and spoke to a smaller audience. Pacifists and anarchists have at times been part of the staff, although the foundation that runs the community pays salaries, and is liberal rather than radical. With these limitations, I feel that they are performing a good service.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Harold Gray, Saline, Michigan</h3>
				<p>Harold had been in jail in World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, and had inherited a large farm near Saline, Michigan. Here he gathered pacifist friends, and had a large dairy, and raised pigs, chickens, and fruits and berries. They had milk and other routes, whereby they sold their products. Harold was Episcopalian, and the others were of varying beliefs, or none. All were pacifists. However, when big wages in the city beckoned, they all left for the fleshpots. I visited there twice when Harold was in the process of selling his herd of cows, as he could not hire men to tend them. He often went to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> farm at South Lyons to get their whole-wheat bread, and in fact drove me there once. Now he is building houses for city folks on his place and is a landlord, with no idea of the community with which he started. He just couldn’t buck the whole Ford way of life.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Spirit Fruit, Lisbon, Ohio</h3>
				<p>In 1907, in my home town, Jacob Beilhart bought an old farmhouse on the edge of town and started a religion by this name. A relative of the man who brought up my father joined it, and was known as “Ma Young.” The local newspaper wrote terrible stories about them worshiping the devil, and when, finally, a girl there from Chicago had a baby, they were driven out of town and went to Kansas, where, after a few years, Jacob died of appendicitis. As I remember it, he dealt with spiritualistic mediums, was against all exploitation of capitalism, and there seemed to be some kind of communal marriage. Everything, of course, was held in common, and those who came gave all they had. There seemed also to be an idea that money would come in abundance if prayers were directed toward the cash. Jacob’s brother in nearby Columbiana was a Socialist. He kept a harness shop, and distributed some of my anti-draft literature in 1917.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Shakers</h3>
				<p>This was an old time group of craftsmen and farmers of the early 1800s. They did communal farming like the Hutterites, but the men lived in one huge stone house, and the women lived in another huge stone house. When my wife and I visited what had been such a community in Kentucky, in 1923, the very old lady told us that there were times when the supposed celibacy was overcome. They were prosperous, but after the Civil War they seemed to get no more recruits, what with the expansion of agriculture to the west, and the conscription which had disturbed the even keel of Shaker farming.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Paul Williams, Nyack, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr></h3>
				<p>This pacifist inherited money from his father and bought the side of a mountain, and began to exercise his unorthodox architectural ideas in housing. He called this a certain cooperative name, built homes for artist friends, charged them a nominal rent, and presently, they live in a congenial community. Each one makes his living as it happens. I visited there one afternoon, and found each home “a castle” as it is supposed to be, with privacy, and yet with the understanding that each neighbor was sympathetic.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Lemurians</h3>
				<p>This group started in Wauwatosa, Wisconsin in 1940. They were young folks who were pacifists and vegetarians, but particularly not anarchists, for they envision a perfect society with a constitution somewhat like that of the United States, but without war. This was all to happen in 1953, when a new continent called Lemuria was to rise from the Pacific, and meanwhile, we here would sink. They moved to California near Los Angeles and bought a farm, and prepared to perfect themselves for the great event of 1953. They printed all of their literature in green ink. But time went by, and nothing happened in the Pacific. I do not know if they advanced the date or not, but they are still on the farm in California. I was not able to visit them last time, but will do so on my next trip west, as I knew them as personable young folks, who printed my statement of refusal to register, for free, in 1942, two of them going as conscientious objectors to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> camp in New Hampshire. In their community in California, they lived in common, each giving all they had when they joined. I have no idea of what the turnover has been with them.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Individuals on Farms who Like the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> Idea</h3>
				<p>A <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> farm was started in the depression, bought for $1,000; and now Carl Paulson, Ridgeroad, Upton, Massachusetts, with his wife Mary and nine children, lives there. He makes a living in stained glass window work. I have visited there half a dozen times. Bill Roach and his wife and nine children also live there. He works in a church furniture factory nearby. The O’Donnells formerly lived in another house, but they have scattered. Carl’s father and mother have built a home nearby also. Each family has a garden, and there are some fruit trees. I have visited thousands of families over the United States, and I would not hope to find a finer one than that of the Paulsons. Carl went to Danbury prison as a conscientious objector. He had married a young artist friend of Ade Bethune, who was a trustee of the farm when it was a communal farm. If I were a young man with a pregnant wife, I would build a house there, and make a living selling milk and honey to the others, and to neighbors.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3><abbr class="initialism">R.</abbr> 1, Springboro, Pennsylvania</h3>
				<p>Jack and Mary Thornton, a farm and a lot of children. Jack worked until recently in a foundry in Erie, and does a lot of farm work. I have visited there several times, and have made calls for friends to come and help Jack. There is room for a dozen families to live on the farm, but they would have to get work in town to supplement their income.</p>
				<p>Bill and Dorothy Gauchaut, Avon, Ohio (near Cleveland), formerly had a small acreage, and ran a home of hospitality on Franklin Street, in Cleveland, for years. They sold their acreage and bought, at a bargain, a large, well-built house. Here, Dorothy take cares of spastic and other crippled babies, and gives hospitality. Bill works for a utility company. I have visited them several times.</p>
				<p>At South Lyons, Michigan, between Ann Arbor and Detroit, Father Hessler, the pacifist anarchist Maryknoll priest in Yucatan, gave a small farm to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> in Detroit. Part of it was deeded to Lou Murphy, who runs the Detroit <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, and the rest of it to several families. They built their homes, and have their gardens, and some animals. They make their main living working in hospitals or at other work. There has been a spirit of friction here for years, and although each family may be very good, they do not seem meant to live so close together. Glen Johnson is the one whom I know on the farm now.</p>
				<p>Jack Woltjen, Bluffton, Missouri, read the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> after he got out of the army, and used the <abbr class="initialism">GI</abbr> Bill to borrow money to buy a large farm. I have helped him build fences and feed hogs the times I have visited there. He works in a hospital part-time, and hopes to be out of the red soon. Here is room for many families to live, and the place is big enough so that they do not need to be too near each other. They are a fine young couple, well worth knowing. Nearby, Ruth Ann Heany, widow of Larry Heany, my good friend in the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> in Milwaukee, lives. She has five children, and a small place. Marty Paul tried to farm with the Heanys, but gave it up and moved to the city. Her black-Irish children are beautiful.</p>
				<p>Bob and Ann Stowell, of Cabot, Vermont, head workcamps in the <abbr class="initialism eoc">U.S.</abbr> They are pacifists, anarchists, and vegetarians, but not Catholics. I have visited them several times. He has been a teacher at the University of Vermont, and does small-job printing too. They work at a southern community in winter. Erie Freedman and wife, a young Jewish couple decided to go to Alaska, and came over to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> to give help and get ideas. They landed in northern British Columbia, and live off the land.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Communities that I have not Visited</h3>
				<p>The Huntington Library, Stanford, California, have a book on twenty efforts at communities in the history of California. I visited Kawea, up in the Sequoia region, where there was once a Socialist community. They have only a very small post office, by a rushing mountain stream, now. The big tree that you drive through there, called “General Sherman,” was first named “Karl Marx,” but that was in the old days of the community. There was the Home Community of anarchists on Puget Sound, but it did not last very long. There was the Theosophical community of Madame Tingley, and many others. I have been not far away from The House of David, at Benton Harbor, Michigan, but I never visited it. Their lawyer was a federal judge in Los Angeles in World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, and resigned and joined this pacifist group, which is really better known as bewhiskered ball players. The son of this lawyer was a conscientious objector, with my friend Rik Anderson, in a camp in California, in World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Ottawa Housing</h3>
				<p>In 1957, when I was speaking in Ottawa, Paul Harris invited me to his home, which was one of 80 built cooperatively. Father Morosco, now Bishop in Toronto, had about 80 families meet weekly and study cooperative housing for a year and a half, until they were ready to pool about $300 each to form a cooperative for a house for each one. They had met weekly in small groups, and all together once a month; mostly Catholics, with a few Protestant friends. Reasonable loans were made, and each did as much work on his own house as possible, with the help of friends. The houses are with four bedrooms, so that Catholics can have large families. They have a common skating rink, and a park.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>In Notre Dame</h3>
				<p>About ten years ago, Julian Pleasants and friends, who were teachers at Notre Dame, bought a farm on the outskirts, and measured it out in five acre lots, with unpaved roads running through. No one made any profit out of it, and each had a place, with congenial neighbors, where living was cheap. I visited them twice in the winter, so do not know just what they could raise in the summer. The houses were not zoned to be expensive. I don’t think they have much of a community life, but at least they have the basis of cheap housing.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Jehovah’s Witnesses, Brooklyn, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr></h3>
				<p>I visited their printing plant, and the huge hotel in which they house their four hundred workers, who print millions of copies of books, and work for their keep. They have fine meals and luxurious quarters, and it is considered an honor to come from all over the world and work there for free. Like the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, workers do not earn a wage, so do not pay an income tax for war. All of the pacifist societies take a war tax from the pay of their employees. It was formerly the rule that those living here could not be married, but this was recently changed⁠—some say, so that some of the big shots could be married. All the <abbr class="initialism">JW</abbr>s live under a discipline that would make any anarchist shiver, and, having little sense of humor, I suppose they take it, and never know what happens. They formerly had a farm near our farm on Staten Island, and I visited that twice. They knew who we were and had brought us some vegetables when we first came there. They now have a much larger farm and a school in upstate New York.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Short Creek, Arizona Mormons</h3>
				<p>On the Sunday morning in 1953 when the Korean War was ended, over 100 state police and deputies came to this peaceful community to arrest 26 men, 38 women, and 154 children because polygamy was practiced. Short Creek is in “The Strip,” which is an area as large as New Hampshire, Delaware, and Rhode Island combined, and with a population of 700. It is north of the Grand Canyon, and logically would belong to Utah, but it is in Arizona. To get there from the county seat, Holbrook, south of the Canyon, is 430 miles around through Nevada and Utah. The suppression of this great rebellion against the “decency” of metropolitan Phoenix was engineered by Republican Governor Howard Pyle in a theatrical attempt to gain votes, but it was one of the reasons for his defeat in the next election. The real issue, of course, in Arizona is that the copper companies never have paid their share of taxes, and the big land companies have prevented any law regulating the ground water that they pump out and thus impoverish ordinary ranchers. All this dust storm about the immorality of the Short Creek Mormons was used to keep the minds of the people from the real issues. When the state police, camera men, reporters, <abbr>etc.</abbr> arrived to conquer this great rebellion against the sovereign state of Arizona, the children were neatly dressed, and stood in the early dawn singing <i epub:type="se:name.music.song">God Bless America</i>. The men were taken to Holbrook, and then to Prescott, to prison, and the women and children to Phoenix, where the Welfare Department portioned them out in rest homes. After some months in prison, the men were released with the half-promise that if they were quiet they could see their children. However, the women were not allowed to see their husbands, and the children are not permitted to see their fathers. An article in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Colliers</i>, for <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 11, 1953, describes the situation. Ray Williams is one of three school teachers in Short Creek. He is a Mormon who has one wife and three children. He has never practiced polygamy, but unless he promises that he will never practice it in the future, he will not be allowed to teach. Furthermore, he is not allowed to see his children or his wife unless he gives up his religious belief of polygamy. Another man of Short Creek is married but has no children, yet he is not allowed to see his wife unless he promises to give up his ideas of polygamy. Meanwhile, the parasite Tommy Manville is free to have a dozen wives, and the courts over the country grind out fake divorces for him and for others. There are many cases of Navajo men having several wives, for the women here own the sheep, and the more sheep he has, the more wealth he has. The government winks at this, and calls the extra wives “boarders.” Maybe it is because the Navajos are so scattered, and it is difficult to tell them apart. Before I came east, the last money I made as a migrant worker was given to the Catholic lawyer who was defending the Short Creek folks. Perhaps by this time promises have been made by the Mormons which they never intend to keep, and the families are together again in Mexico, or some place else. I plan to visit Short Creek sometime, and see how these folks live in community.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Order of Aaron</h3>
				<p>Maryellen Fullem drove me the 230 miles southwest of Salt Lake City, through the town of Delta to within six miles to Eskdale, on the Nevada line, where this group has 3,000 acres in the desert, a school of 50 children, and 17 adults who raise food for the colony and alfalfa for their stock. At Partoun, 50 miles north, they have 5,000 acres where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Card, an early convert to the group, lives and helps take care of their land. They also have a sawmill at the top of a mountain, near Price. I had met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Conrad, a cheery, outgoing man, who, along with his wife, are teachers here, two years ago, when Mary and I were picketing the tax office. We visited some classes, and later heard the string orchestra play classical music. I spoke of the Indians, and made friends with ten-year-old Mary, who was especially interested. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Conrad receive a salary from the state for teaching these children, and this money is a help to the colony. They have eight of their own, and a divorcée is there with five children. The others are boarded at $30 a month from families of the Order who cannot live here at present. Members also tithe to Bishop Glendenning, and he has a Council of Twelve, and a Patriarch, as in the Mormon Church, and a successor determined in case of his death. He is 72 years of age.</p>
				<p>The custom here at meals is to eat silently. The girls wear blue corduroy dresses, but the boys wear whatever they happen to have. Fields of alfalfa dot the desert. The Snake Mountains are about ten miles to the west, and the colony is six miles off the highway leading from Delta to Ely, Nevada. The nearest town is Garrison, Utah. They have their own power, for lights and for pumping water, from a diesel outfit. Their small houses are of wood, and unpainted. Water is pumped into a wooden tank so they have water pressure. Small trees stick up hopefully around the place.</p>
				<p>We spoke for a time with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> LaRue Snow Young (a good Mormon name), whose husband, until his death two years ago, had been one of their leaders. These folks are ex-Mormons who believe in living cooperatively with all in common, like the Hutterites, whose King Colony in Montana, where Dorothy and I have visited, they have also contacted. This cooperative effort they call The United Order, this being the Mormon term used by Joseph Smith and Brigham Young. They also live The Word of Wisdom, which means that they do not smoke or drink, as good Mormons are supposed to do. Those who use tea or coffee do so as long as they feel they have to, but this is frowned upon. They are pacifists, and teach that the Lord will soon come, so they have unsheathed their sword and taken up the Bible, and all their young men go to alternative service rather than go in the armed services. They are not polygamists, although many people around here think there would be no other reason for so many women and children to be hidden away in the desert.</p>
				<p>While we were picketing the tax man here in 1961, Mary and I were invited to a singing fest of this Order at a private home, and I was asked to say a few words. A chiropractor, by the name of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr class="initialism">M.L.</abbr> Glendenning, had started this group 30 years ago, but it was not legally chartered until 20 years ago. I subscribed to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> for him and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Conrad in 1961. I looked up their address, but <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Glendenning and his wife were in Arizona. I spoke to a middle-aged woman in charge, and she explained the principles of the Order; and I bought a book, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Now My Servant</i>, by Blanche <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Beeston, Caxton Press, Caldwell, Idaho, 1957, which tells of the life of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Glendenning. According to this book, he is said to have heard a voice, supposed to be Elias, speak to him since the age of 14. These messages are collected in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Book of Elias</i>. He has been directed, he states, to documents left by his ancestors, in this country and Scotland, proving that he is a lineal descendant of The Order of Aaron, and that he was directed to continue this Order. Converts have been made in Provo and Salt Lake City. At the semiannual Mormon Conference April 6, 1931, because of the activity of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Glendenning, Joseph Fielding Smith declared that no messages or revelations were bona fide unless they came to the President of the Mormon Church. An attempt is made to prove from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Book of Mormon</i> and their <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Doctrine and Covenants</i> that this Order of Aaron is not spurious. I have spoken to men outside this group who know <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Glendenning, and they say he is sincere, and acts fairly with those who join the Order, and that it is not a fraudulent group. I have met leaders of other religions who have claimed to have received Divine instructions, and I have found that their main emphasis was upon collecting money from the gullible, and that their private lives were materialistic and gluttonous, and far removed from the ideal which they preached.</p>
				<p>At Eskdale, they keep Saturday as the Sabbath; but in Salt Lake City, they keep Sunday. I have attended their Sunday meetings and find them a cheerful and sincere group. If I meet <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Glendenning, later, and more of this group, I will be able to form an opinion about them. Right now, I am favorably impressed. Those who join the Order are on probation for a year, and, after the first noviceship, anything that they turn over cannot be refunded if they leave the Order. The writer of this book says that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Glendenning will allow a person whom he has chosen to do any certain work the freedom to make mistakes, for by this method he will learn the hard way, and the lesson will stick. This is the only pacifist group that I have met that has come out of the Mormon lineage. It is easier for those raised for generations in an “out-of-this-world” religion to remain “unspotted from the world.” But for the Bruderhof, Koinonia in Georgia, and this group to take people out of the commercial life of the cities, and expect their children to grow up and not to go back to the fleshpots, is surely a problem. The personality of a leader may hold them together as long as he lives, but generally there is a fight over who is to succeed in authority. This has happened among the Doukhobors, Molokons, and Bruderhof. If the organization squelches all discord, affairs may run smoothly, but it is likely that the spirit may be lost, as has happened to all orthodox religions. If these new groups cannot prove by their lives, as the Hutterites have done, that they do lead the true Christian life, then they have no excuse for existing.</p>
				<p>Always, there have been remnants of the early Mormons who felt that their freedom of religion allowed them to have more than one wife, despite what they called the “sellout” of the Salt Lake Mormons. They felt also that the centralized authority of the banking and other industrial interests of the rich Mormons in the big cities of Utah was not the real spirit of those early Mormons who trekked the desert, and worked and suffered in common. Somehow, also, these Mormons got away from the bloodthirstiness of their <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Book of Mormon</i> and took the pacifist attitude of The Sermon on the Mount. Without using the words, these folks were primitive pacifists and anarchists, for they had seceded from the state and were breaking the laws of the state. They lived with everything common except wives, just as the early Christians had lived.</p>
				<p>There was the New Home colony on Long Island founded by Josiah Warren of Bunker Hill lineage. It lasted until that generation had died away and the young folks became city and capitalist minded. There was the Socialist Colony in Ruskin, Tennessee founded by <abbr class="name">J.A.</abbr> Wayland of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Appeal to Reason</i>. Debs went there once. It lasted only a short time. And of course there was the classic Oneida Community founded by John <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Noyes, which lasted only part of a generation and ended up as a financial success in the famous Oneida Community Silver. Books have been written about the community of wives here, and of the discipline whereby the sexual act was prolonged. There was a lot of opposition to this community, but Noyes, who was a brave and forceful man, fought for his rights. Whether or not his leadership kept anyone else from developing sufficient strength to carry on when he gave up, at least the community did not last for long.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The Catholic Worker</h3>
				<p>“People shipwrecked on an island⁠—that’s not a community: that’s a disaster⁠—that’s the Catholic Worker!” All of the things that made for the failure of other communities that have failed, or that are now on the skids: we have all that and yet survive somehow. We take in those that no one else will have, and for many there is no other place to go, and some of them stay with us until they die. Our New York group had its first farm at Easton, which was taken over by some families.</p>
				<p>We did some good for many, and how much we will never know. There were many retreats there, and vacations for children; but as a farming commune, we were a failure.</p>
				<p>Our next, Maryfarm at Newburgh was again the occasion of many retreats where spiritual seed was sown, and we raised plenty of food, but civilization in the form of jet planes that worried cows and chickens, and liquor too close by, coupled with the fact that it was really too far from New York City, caused us to sell the farm. Our Peter Maurin Farm on Staten Island grows plenty of vegetables, and we have retreats and meetings there, but it is in no manner self-sustaining. It is really just another House of Hospitality, such as we have in New York City. It serves a purpose and it is a community, somewhat as a jail is a community⁠—not that you can’t leave the farm, but it is a place that never can be considered a community in the sense of any of the others which we have discussed; it is like our place in town⁠—a station where people come and wait until they can make up their minds where to buy a ticket to, and if they can’t make up their minds, they stay.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Conclusion</h3>
				<p>It would seem that the only communities that carry on successfully are those of a small religious sect who feel that they have the truth, and they also have a discipline that keeps them away from the outside world. The test comes when it is seen whether or not the second generation carries on the idea. The most successful would seem to be the Hutterites. I have read of communities in England such as the Taena, which is Catholic and nearly a part of monastic life, and of Lanzo De Vasta’s L’Arche in France, and numerous ones in India. I do not have enough firsthand information about them to form an opinion. For myself, I would rather live out in the world, and propagandize “the heathen,” and fight the devil, there. Within the next few years, readers of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> will see from my writings what I think is valuable about the polygamous Mormons in Utah, Idaho, and Arizona. I intend to visit the Argenta Community, near Nelson, <abbr class="postal">B.C.</abbr>, Canada.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
