<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 15</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter15" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 15</h2>
				<h3>Speaking</h3>
				<h3>1953⁠–⁠1961</h3>
				<h4>Wall Street⁠–⁠Fordham⁠–⁠Other New York Meetings⁠–⁠New England States⁠–⁠South⁠–⁠Mid-West⁠–⁠Mountain States⁠–⁠West Coast⁠–⁠Canada</h4>
			</header>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4>Wall Street</h4>
				<p><em>Here is the center of exploitation of the world.</em> Actually, Wall Street begins at Trinity Church and ends at the American Sugar Refining Company at 120 Wall, where it runs into Front Street. As Eric Gill would say, metaphysically and commercially Wall Street extends to Times Square, <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s, Fordham, Columbia, and to all the places where the Sermon on the Mount is ignored or watered down, and where the devil is worshiped.</p>
				<p>Here in New York City, I spoke for the season in 1954 at Broad and Wall Streets. The law in this state is to have a fairly large American flag. I also had a standard with a cut of <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis, as drawn by Eichenberg, with the current <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> attached to it, and I stood on a small aluminum step ladder. I kept this paraphernalia at the <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> hall, lower down on Broad Street. Once, I had the flag upside down, and a woman made a complaint to a cop; and once an inch of it touched the ground, and I was ordered to lift it higher. But one cold day, my nose dripped, and I could not get at my handkerchief without getting someone to hold my flag and sign, so unknowingly I used the flag for a handkerchief. My audience must have been entranced, for no one noticed it. A <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> girl standing by told me afterwards about it. Sometimes I would have the competition of “The Bishop,” a husky Southerner in a homberg, who arrived in a limousine and denounced “The Whore of Babylon,” meaning the Catholic Church. Sometimes I got his crowd away, and sometimes he diminished mine. After years when I was not speaking, but was selling <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s nearby and would walk by, he would take a paper from me and tell his crowd, “You know what I think of the so and so Pope, but this <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> is a good paper, and my friend Hennacy is what I call a good Catholic who goes to jail for his ideas.”</p>
				<p>Patricia Rusk and I had visited John Moody, of The Moody Investment Service and Moody Manual of Business. He had known Peter in the early days, was a convert, and had been a Single Taxer, which was quite radical then. I had told him that time belonged to God and not to bankers, not even 1%. He bought my book, and later wrote to me saying:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>I pray for your success every Tuesday when you are speaking on Wall Street. You are getting under the sculls of people. I hear about it. God bless you.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Another time a man said to me, “For 41 years I was a Catholic and now I left the damn church.” I replied: “That’s fine. It wasn’t for you. For 51 years I was not a Catholic and now I joined the Church, and we are both happy.”</p>
				<p>Once a man said to me, “What are you first, a Catholic or an anarchist?” Some months before, a Protestant had asked how I evaluated my ideas, and I had put being a Catholic fourth. In October of 1954, I was confirmed at Newburgh by Bishop Flannery, (Administrator) of <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s Cathedral, along with many others. I had given his secretary a copy of my book, and four years later I discovered it was on his desk. Whether he had waited four years to read it, or read it again after four years, I do not know. I never spoke to him personally. I had not noticed anything special at this confirmation. But now, I guess, my confirmation caught up with me, for I answered:</p>
				<ol>
					<li>I am Catholic and go to Mass and Communion daily, worthily I hope.</li>
					<li>To live poor, for the world’s baggage bogs you down.</li>
					<li>To love your enemy, not everyone but your enemy.</li>
					<li>To bring this out in small groups of like minded people.</li>
					<li>To be a worker and not a parasite, and this cuts out all Wall Street.</li>
					<li>To be an anarchist, for if you live a dedicated life and vote for this and that politician to return evil for evil in courts, prisons and war, you deny Christ.</li>
					<li>I do not smoke, drink, eat meat, or take medicine, for if tomorrow “come the revolution,” I can’t “revolut” if I am tied to an aspirin or a cigarette.</li>
				</ol>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>At Fordham</h3>
				<p>I spoke there seven times, but not until I had stood outside the gates for some years, selling <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s and getting acquainted. I was finally invited to speak to The Economics Club, the Suarez Society, and Fordham Political Union on “The Position of a Political Anarchist in the Catholic Church.” I had to tell them that the term “political” was a misnomer. I told them,</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p> …that when I spoke to Protestants, they asked why I had joined the worst church, and when I spoke to Catholics, they asked how they let a guy like me in. I replied to the Protestants that of course the Catholic Church was the worst church; that they would be just as bad if they knew how, they were jealous. And to the Catholics I said that I was baptized by an anarchist priest, Father Casey near Minneapolis, the only one in this country (there was one in Yucatan and one in Canada, but they were too far away), and that you didn’t have to be a Democrat or a Republican to be a priest. And when I was baptized, I had had to read the Catechism. <i>The Fourth Commandment</i> said to honor and obey your parents, and from this it followed to obey the civil authorities.</p>
					<p>“What kind of a Church am I getting into; have I got to mind the cops?”</p>
					<p>“No,” said Father Casey, “That’s just for people who don’t know any better.</p>
					<p>We know better, we have to do better. There’s likely a little corner in Heaven for Catholic hangmen (they don’t know any better⁠—no one told them)⁠—right next to the bingo players. But there is another place where Saint Francis, Saint Martin of Tours, and others are. If we want to see them, we have to try to be like them. <i>This is what this commandment means today: when Jesus was asked what to do with the woman caught in sin He said: “he that is without sin among you first cast a stone at her.” And His teaching was to love the enemy, forgive seventy times seven; turn the other cheek. So today, if you vote for anyone who makes a law saying five days, five years, life, or death if you do something or if you don’t do something; or if you vote for the judge who pronounces the sentence; or if you vote for the governor or president who appoints the hangman or the jailers, then these men are your servants; they are your arm to throw the stone, and you deny Christ.</i> Now, you folks don’t have to be in a hurry to be an anarchist, for I was 59 years getting to be a Catholic. But I am sent here to waken you up, and you can’t say you never heard it; you will have to sweat a little from now on; you will have to approximate the anarchist way if you want to be a real Catholic, or a real Christian.</p>
					<p>And the <i>Fifth Commandment</i> says Thou Shalt Not Kill, but the Catechism says it is permitted to kill in a just war, capital punishment, and self defense. Father Casey said that of course there was no just war; that capital punishment denied the Sermon on the Mount, and that I had defended myself much better when I shook hands with the man with the knife, than if I had used a knife⁠—that I couldn’t use knives and guns like other Catholics, for I knew better, so I had to do better. Now of course, on the subject of war, the Holy Father has said that a Catholic cannot be a conscientious objector in a just war. And there are no unjust wars for the Catholics in any certain country. They are supposed to obey their rulers. It is the other country that has the “unjust” war. So in Italy, Catholics killed for God and Mussolini, and in Ethiopia they killed for God and Haile Selaissie, And in Germany, for God and Hitler, and in this country, for God and the man who said “I tell you again, again and again, that no boys will be sent across to war.” The fact is that the true meaning of the word “Catholic” is “universal,” and God does not have any country, for we are all brothers. Once, a Sunday School teacher was reading from the Bible, and she read the passage where “God spoke unto Joshua saying kill all the Ammonites, Jebusites, Moabites, and suffer not a one to live.” A little girl raised her hand and said:</p>
					<p><em>“Teacher, that must have been before God got to be a Christian.”</em><i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Life</i> magazine a few years ago had an old English woodcut showing the hanging of pickpockets. This public Spectacle was supposed to deter pickpockets, but at this public hanging the pickpockets worked the crowd. When I was in prison in Atlanta I met many counterfeiters; they were not the best ones, they were the second best, for the best ones were out making money⁠—I mean “making money.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Then I told of my life in prison, of my anti-tax activity. I spoke later, half a dozen times, to classes, and as I travel over the country, I find former Fordham students who greet me.</p>
				<p>A priest from a ritzy Bronx church asked me to speak at a Communion breakfast, just before <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s Day. I suggested that Dorothy speak, as I would be too radical. He replied that he wanted me to jolt the “lace-curtain,” complacent Irish in his parish. It was a very ritzy breakfast in a hotel, with an Irish audience of police, <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr>, <abbr>etc.</abbr> character. Naturally, few agreed with me. When the meeting was over the priest said: “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy is an anarchist, and he is a Catholic, and maybe a better Catholic than I am. It is good for you to hear him, and that is why I brought him here to waken you to the possibilities of what our Gospel might mean to us.” I spoke in classes in Catholic high schools, and to the Information Center on Staten Island, and to the Newman Clubs at Brooklyn and Brooklyn Technical. Here the priests made it plain that they did not agree with me, but wanted the students to hear what I had to say. A meeting at the Walter Farrell Guild, where liberal Catholics hold forth, was very interesting. The liberals, who are for good capitalism, good wars, and the impossible task of trying to make sense out of “workers councils and employers councils” and no class struggle between the two, per the Pope’s encyclicals, no doubt find the forthright radicalism of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> aggravating, and seemingly unreasonable.</p>
				<p>May the first, in 1958, was a busy day for me, as I spoke, wearing a red ribbon, to the Bronx Science High School, which is one of the two best schools in this country, according to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Time</i> magazine of that week. Here, the students were enthusiastic, and I was to meet some of them later in picket lines. Then a busload of students came up from Drew University, for the third time in as many years, and I spoke to them, and at midnight I attended a committee meeting against atomic tests.</p>
				<p><i epub:type="se:name">Nightbeat</i> is a program on television where John Wingate interviewed two people for half an hour each. This was not previewed. His secretary read my book, and interviewed me. I never saw Wingate until the minute I entered the television room, when he said to me, “My last question will be about Cardinal Spellman. Will you answer it?” I replied that I would. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wingate picked out of half a dozen definitions in the dictionary on anarchism, the one which mentioned “chaos,” and gave a statement from an anonymous theologian that a Catholic could not be an anarchist. I gave my definitions of anarchism and explained my application of it, and of course, there are all kinds of theologians, and none of them bind me to disobey my conscience; and besides, I was baptized by an anarchist priest. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wingate good-naturedly chided me on my vegetarianism, pacifism, and refusal to take medicine. He asked me if I believed in the infallibility of the Pope. I said I did when he was infallible, and when he wasn’t, he was talking through the Pope’s hat. I explained that we respected Spellman as a Cardinal, but were not bound to agree with any of his patriotic and anti-union ideas; that he had a lot of patience with us, and had never picketed us. And that I was bound to obey my conscience above any Church authority. Stuart Cloete, the novelist from Africa, followed me on the program. As we were waiting, I traded books with him. He had whiskers, and most of his time was spent in a defense of wearing them. The night before Christmas, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wingate’s secretary phoned, and asked if I would be on their Christmas program. A Baptist minister from New Jersey, who had a Christmas party in July to get clothing for an Indian mission in the West, explained his novel scheme. Some Salvation Army lassies explained their procedure. A chorus of Negroes from a Harlem Church sang. I suppose I was to represent the Catholics. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wingate went over all of my wild ideas and goodnaturedly kidded me about them. I replied in like manner. Christ and the Sermon on the Mount is my guide to determine truth. For years I have met people on the street who saw me on these programs, and stop and ask me questions.</p>
				<p>For several times in the fall, I spoke at a Socialist picnic at Massepaqua Long Island, along with Earl Browder and Norman Thomas. I knew Earl in the old days, when he was released from Leavenworth as a <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr> in World War <span class="z3998:roman">I</span>. He gets further and further away from radicalism. Norman is always a good speaker and fighter for what he believes, but he gets less and less radical as he grows older. It was up to me to speak of the old days of Debs and Mother Bloor, and to dare them to come alive.</p>
				<p>Father Meyer, at the Episcopalian Henry Street Settlement on the Lower East Side, is a friend of ours. He gets his money from the corrupt Trinity Church, but he puts it to good use. If any of the kids in the gangs are fighting, and one of them touches his hands on <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Meyer’s Church, that is sanctuary. His work with the gangs is the best that has been done by anyone. He has spoken here at the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> twice, and Dorothy and I have been down to his Church speaking to his young folks twice.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>In the New England States</h3>
				<p>Holy Cross Seminary, at Worcester, <abbr class="postal">Mass.</abbr>, is a conservative Jesuit college. A student from there had bought a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism caps">CW</abbr></i> and my book from me at 43rd and Lexington, and wrote for me to come there. I got there at 5 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr>, and he said, “You very nearly didn’t have a meeting.”</p>
				<p>“How come?” I asked.</p>
				<p>“At 1 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr>, the Dean called me in, and said, ‘I find that the Catholic Worker is subversive, and Hennacy is the worst one. The meeting is cancelled. I’ll put a guard at the gate and not allow him on the campus.’ ”</p>
				<p>At 2 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> the student received a letter from Bishop Wright, saying, “I hear our mutual friend Ammon is speaking tonight. I would like to attend his meeting but cannot do so for I have a meeting of my own. Have him call this phone number at 9:30 and I’ll see him in the morning. God bless Ammon and the Catholic Worker.”</p>
				<p>The student showed this letter to the Dean, and he said, “Have your meeting.” The room was crowded, and I was answering questions in the students’ rooms until 1:30 in the morning.</p>
				<p>About the same time, a Methodist and a Lutheran student, who had heard me in the Midwest, and who were now studying to be missionaries in foreign countries, asked me to speak at the Hartford Theological Seminary. When I got there, the students told me I very nearly didn’t have a meeting. It seemed that the professor in charge of meetings in the building where I was supposed to speak was afraid of the word “anarchist,” and asked my friends if they could get me to speak without using this dreadful word. They said that was one of my especial words. This professor conferred with the president, and he did not wish to take the responsibility, so the board of trustees decided that if I said I was a “Catholic anarchist,” and not a Protestant one, I could have a meeting. So for once, I hid behind the Church.</p>
				<p>At Dartmouth, the Christian Union turned out to hear me with much interest, but the Catholic youth who had suggested my coming got frightened, and when he heard that I was speaking to the class of a Catholic <abbr>prof.</abbr> in the morning, he notified the young, conservative Catholic Chaplain, who tried to stop my talk to the class. I spoke. But later, the Bishop of New Hampshire would not allow me to speak in that state. He died, and I have no contract with that state since; and it is just as well, as it has a bad reputation in jailing <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Uphaus.</p>
				<p><abbr>Prof.</abbr> Bourcier, of Middlebury College in Vermont, had inv1ted me to come there and speak, but the authorities thought I would be “too controversial.” He ordered four of my books and gave them to these men to read, and I was invited to speak, having fine meetings with hours of questioning at the College, and a large meeting at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s parochial school. I had stayed at the home of the priest that night, and in the morning he looked up the definition of anarchism which meant “chaos,” but after my explanation of it, he phoned to the grade school and had me speak to classes there. I had also spoken to Trinity College in Burlington, and to nearby <abbr>St.</abbr> Michaels, as well as meetings at Brattleboro and Putney College.</p>
				<p>I spent a night at the home of a Quaker, Herbert Leader, in Burlington, <abbr class="postal">Vt.</abbr>, and he told me I was to speak to some classes at the <abbr class="initialism">U.</abbr> of <abbr class="postal">Vt.</abbr> the next day. The first one was on labor history. I sang <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> songs, told them of Mother Jones, Debs, and Joe Hill, and answered questions for a long time. The next class was in sociology, where a student gave a review of an article by Protestant ministers who had visited Moscow. I had heard these ministers here at the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, and gave further information and, also, the report of a Catholic priest who had been imprisoned by the Communists in China for six years, and who emerged more friendly to the Communists than to the usurper Chiang. Too many priests there are agents of “American imperialism,” and it cannot be expected that the Chinese would like them. The next class was a two-hour seminar on social work, so I was at home describing my life as a social worker, and life now on the Bowery. That night, I spoke to a large meeting of students on <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> ideas. I was interested in <abbr>St.</abbr> Albans, as this was the town where Morgans Raiders held up and robbed the local bank after their escape from Plattsburg prison in the Civil War time. Raider Morgan had been captured near my home town of Lisbon, Ohio. Later, Joanna Sturm and I saw a movie based on this <abbr>St.</abbr> Albans robbery.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>New England Town Meeting</h3>
				<p>With my farmer vegetarian friends Bob and Ann Stowell I visited the Town Meeting to which they belong at Cabot, <abbr class="postal eoc">Vt.</abbr> A preliminary meeting had been held where anyone who desired questions to be discussed could present them, so that each voter now had a printed booklet on the 28 motions to be voted on that day. There was much discussion of an increase in tax for roads. About two-thirds of the town population were there, and there were more women than men present. Only those who paid a $10 poll tax could vote at the meeting, although this did not prevent them from voting in state or national elections if they did not pay their town poll tax. The Moderator is only paid for one day of the year at this meeting. He had been elected for years, and was an employee of the local cheese coop. He was voted out because he took the unpopular side of desiring a centralized school for three towns, which would cost $10,000 interest. It was defeated by 168 to 7, and a prosperous farmer became Moderator. The five Catholics present voted for free taxes for five years for the local Masonic Hall; they might as well be good-humored about it. Men are elected to run the town, not according to political party, banjo playing, or baby kissing, but because all these folks know each other, and there is no passing the buck if you are found inefficient. As an anarchist, I could stand for this decentralized <em>administration of things, not the legislation of morals</em>.</p>
				<p>A man by the name of Francis had a meeting for me, at his house, for Amherst students and friends. A neighbor, whose first name was Francis, received the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, and by mistake it was delivered to my non-Catholic friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Francis, who liked it, and invited his neighbor. At Harvard, Yale, Boston <abbr class="initialism">U.</abbr>, and Springfield College, I had interesting meetings. I spoke to classes at the <abbr class="initialism">U.</abbr> of Connecticut at Storrs, having come there on the invitation of the Newman Club, but the priest got scared and cancelled the meeting a few hours before it was scheduled. In Provincetown, I went to visit my friends, Lee and Vicki Pagano, and my two godchildren, Pier and Jackie, and spoke to resident artists and friends, among them the old time radical Harry Kemp, who became a Catholic before his death. Somehow, I spoke to a businessman’s club at the Agawan Catholic Church and, after a couple of hours, most of those present understood me, even if they did not agree with me. I also spoke at Brandeis College on that trip.</p>
				<p>In February of 1957, I accepted the generous invitation of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Paquette, of Waterville, Maine, to extract 19 roots and make an upper plate. I had gone around for years with one tooth in front, figuring that the education of my daughters and the printing of my autobiography was more important than my looks. Seems that most of my teeth were chalky, and broke off, all of these years. After X-rays, I had these roots extracted in four sessions⁠—at my insistence, without the aid of any drugs. It did hurt a little and I could not help a tear now and then, but I had inadvertently chosen a skillful dentist, who did a minimum of gouging, and who had a sure grip on the forceps. I found I could say “Mississippi” without any lisping. In fact, I spoke to two meetings the first night, and meetings every other night, while this dental work was going on. I spoke to my first Lions Club, telling them what I have mentioned before, that “the early Christians were thrown to the lions rather than put a pinch of incense on the altar to Caesar, while the modern ones join the Lions Club.” I spoke to some students at Colby College. Father Gower, of the local Catholic Church, had me speak to some laymen, and a tape recording was taken of my talk. My message was so radical and so new to these good men, that I had to spend two other nights explaining and answering questions, with the help of Father Gower and a retreat priest from Augusta, until they were convinced, and in all good humor felt that a Catholic could also be a radical. This layman came down to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> for a week, later, to get better acquainted with us. I also spoke to a social worker group at Gould Farm, <abbr>Gt.</abbr> Barrington, <abbr class="postal eoc">Mass.</abbr></p>
				<p>The Canterbury Boys School is a ritzy place, founded by Havemeyer Sugar, at New Milford, <abbr class="postal eoc">Conn.</abbr> There is a priest there, but the teachers are lay people. I have seldom been so enthusiastically received by an audience, although nearly all that I said was new to the boys. They crowded around and bought twenty of my books, wanted to know “if I believed in unions,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Later they sent a large donation to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. In later years, I have met them as I was talking in other colleges, or was selling <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s on the streets.</p>
				<p>An anarchist instructor invited me to speak at Brown University and a Monsignor came to the meetings.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Speaking in the South</h3>
				<p>There are very few Catholics in the South outside of Louisiana, and the tendency is to try to appear patriotic and regular, for they are in a disliked minority. For years I had written answers to the capitalistic letters that Bill Stevens, a convert, had written to us from Charlottesville, <abbr class="postal eoc">Va.</abbr> Finally, he met me at the bus when I was on my way to Florida, and we became acquainted. He had a page-long introduction to my book inserted in it when he gave it to the public library in his home town. It read in part:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Hennacy’s mother is a Fitz-Randolph. He loves Thomas Jefferson, Francis of Assisi, Tolstoy, and Gandhi. His “bomb” is the Sermon on the Mount; his “persuader” instead of the hydrogen bomb, which he abhors with a passion, is the Palm Branch, a durable weapon … Hennacy puts the phony gliberal in his place and gives a clear perspective to true Convervatism (of the individual).</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Numerous friends had me speak at Norfolk. Bill and Gay Houston had me speak to student friends at Morehouse University where he was then teaching, in Atlanta. Francis Coyle had me speak to classes at the University of Georgia, but the meeting at the Newman Club was cancelled as being “too controversial.” This was at Athens. At Chapel Hill, <abbr class="postal">N.C.</abbr>, Ronald Gosslein had me speak at the home of a radical professor, and I met the Catholic Chaplain, who was liberal. Dick Bayer, of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Charlotte <abbr class="postal">N.C.</abbr> News</i>, had me speak at the Unitarian Church in nearby Monroe. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams, a Catholic, had asked her priest if she could come to the Unitarian Church to hear me. Her husband, head of the <abbr class="initialism">NAACP</abbr>, and later publicized as one Negro who would use a gun instead of the pacifist method against white aggression, accompanied her. I saw the bullet holes in their car where the White Citizens Council had shot at them. I had written to all six of our subscribers in Nashville, Tennessee, telling them that I would be through their town on a certain day, and I would like to meet them. A professor at Vanderbuilt University, who was not a pacifist but who liked the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> for years, phoned me at Tell City, Indiana and planned a meeting for me, where I spoke to his class in theology. Some subscribers from the Methodist magazine <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Motive</i> in that city, who liked us, came to this class. No Catholic took the paper in Nashville, and the Catholic Chaplain was aggrieved because someone of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> had spoken in classes, instead of a patriotic Catholic.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Doering teach at a plush boys school north of Birmingham, and had written to me to come and visit them. A fellow teacher asked me to speak to these white, Protestant boys, and I spent all of my two days answering questions. Later, I discovered that, on the last afternoon, a police van from Birmingham was outside, and they were getting ready to defend me. I had been talking about jails all along, so it seemed natural for the police to be after me again. But nothing happened. I stayed two days at the Divine Word Seminary, at Bay <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis, Mississippi, an integrated school where a Negro, Father Perry, is the head, and where white and colored students live together. The only manner in which the state punished them was not to allow them any surplus commodities. Father Perry is one of the finest priests whom I have met. In New Orleans I spoke at Tulane, Notre Dame, Xavier, Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament, and the Caritas group. I met a seminarian who said that I had argued with him for years on Wall Street, until he had quit his “unholy” job, and come here to study to be a priest. At Dean Stephen Ryan’s, I had the pleasure of meeting Father Fichter, known all over the country as a courageous priest. At Lafayette, <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Sigur and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ward made me welcome, and I met many interested students and faculty members at this large Southwestern University. The diocesian paper here, and the local paper, and also the New Orleans paper gave me a fair story. In New Orleans, I spoke to Protestants who had read the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> for years. The wife of one of these ministers asked me, “What can I do with those War Bonds my folks gave for my children? I can throw away the guns and turn off the gangster shows on television, but I can’t throw the money away.” I remembered a friend of mine who, at Christmastime, had a date with a Southern divorcee. Just before coming to her home, he had received a telegram from his friend Joe that he was sick and had lost his job. He mentioned this to the woman, and she said, “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pat, your friend will have a miserable Christmas. This will never do. Here, send this to him.” And she went to the large family Bible and gingerly took out a $50 bill and gave it to my friend. “I keep this money in the Bible to perhaps purify it, for it has the picture of that Yankee Grant on each bill.”</p>
				<p>My answer to this woman was to cash the War Bonds, thus not being guilty of receiving any more bloody interest, and place the money in not too large or too small bills in the Bible, and as occasion offered for any especial personal need of others, to give it out, but not to organizations. If any remained when the children grew up, it would be for them, and if it was all gone, then it had already served a good purpose.</p>
				<p>In Oklahoma City, I stayed at the home of Byerly’s, Quakers, and had a fine meeting at the Catholic Secular Institute where priests, nuns and visiting students from Norman attended. The diocesan paper, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Courier</i>, gave me a fine write-up, saying that I had “a firm theology all [my] own;” a fine picture on the front page with the inscription “A visit with an anarchist,” and one on the inside with two nuns. Here, a Carmelite brother wanted me to answer the article in the October 1959 <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Homiletie and Pastoral Review</i> by Father Leslie Rumble, entitled “Catholic Pacifism Repudiated,” supposed to be an answer to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Morals and Missiles</i> by English pacifists. Father Rumble said that Christ never implied anything against war in His teachings in the Sermon on the Mount, or elsewhere. Denying Christ, he quotes the theologian to the Cardinal of England as saying, “if asked, the confessor must declare conscientious objection to be wrong and sinful.” For Father Rumble to declare Catholic pacifism “abnormal,” and his declaration in favor of war normal, is to forget Benedict <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span> who, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication">Peace of God</i>, 1920, said, “The Gospel command of love applies between states just as it does between individual men.” Father Rumble commits the same mistake in 1960 as happened at the time of Joan of Arc, when those in the employ of the English exploiters and rulers, and who spoke for the Church, burned her. To follow Father Rumble is to place the Church where Communists today say it is: on the side of oppression, exploitation and war.</p>
				<p>I was welcomed by radicals and Catholics at Las Vegas, <abbr class="postal">N.M.</abbr>, and spoke to classes at Highland University there, first going to early Mass at Montezuma Seminary, where hundreds of Mexican seminarians are studying. I had been in Santa Fe many times visiting my daughters, and after I was a Catholic, I became acquainted with the Medical Missionaries, the good nuns who delivered babies, within a radius of forty miles, for free, for the poor Mexicans and Indians. Dorothy had spoken there, and I spoke to them at a meeting where Quakers, anarchists, and pacifists came. Carmen lived next door to them for some years. Someone got to the Bishop with the word that the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> was Communist, and he sent word that I was not allowed to speak to the nuns, so twice I have visited with them, but have had meetings at private homes of interested Catholics. This is the Bishop who became so excited about a girl appearing in a beauty contest, but who says nothing about the atom bombs being made, for years, in nearby Los Alamos. I have reviewed several books in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> dealing with the history of Santa Fe and the Indians, and am glad that my daughter is married and living in this beautiful city 8,000 feet high, with the clear air, and the Indian traditions.</p>
				<p>When living in Albuquerque from 1942 to 1947, I had met with Protestant pacifists, but had not known any Catholic pacifists. The Newman Club, at the University of New Mexico, run by the Dominicans, is a beautiful place. Just as I was announced, the bells tolled reporting the death of Pius <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. I had to tell over and over again my realistic approach to pacifism and war, which is that, as Gandhi said, “it is better to kill a tyrant than it is to knuckle and obey him, but it is much better to make him your friend.” And, quoting Forrest the Southerner, “he who gets there fustest with the mostest wins.” If we are not pacifists, then to talk of us disarming is foolish. As long as we are exploiters, we must guard our loot; only when we give up our capitalism and imperialism and our loot can we talk of acting like Christians. Ed Abbey, author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Brave Cowboy</i>, about two anarchists in an Albuquerque jail, drove me to Carmen’s in Santa Fe that night, after the meeting.</p>
				<p>It is very seldom that a prophet has honor in his home town, and I consider Phoenix one of my home towns. When I was a pacifist and not a Catholic, there, for six years, I was a scandal to the bourgeois-minded pacifists and Quakers, although they liked me in private conversation; but I was always getting arrested, it seemed. And when I came back as a Catholic of six months, my Catholic friends and priests liked me, but it was too sudden for them to sponsor me at public meetings. So it was not until 1960, when I was back after my release from Sandstone prison, that Bea Trudelle had a meeting in a northern suburb for me, at a dancing studio. And, through a labor-minded lawyer, I was asked to speak a few words at the Catholic Labor group at the ritzy <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis Xavier Church. But no one knew I was coming, so it did not excite anyone. My very dearest friends are in Phoenix, but that does not mean public meetings. There is no rational way of explaining why the Mayor of Phoenix, Jack Williams, should have me speak on his radio station and give my radical ideas without censorship. And later, when he refused to run for mayor, he still had me on the air. He does not agree with any of my ideas, but he liked the Old Pioneer, and stood up for me even when I was going to jail, and he was only a commentator, and did not own the station, and was not mayor. Likewise, Don Dedera has given me a good hand in his column, quoting me as saying, “ ‘A man has two means of protection⁠—the Bible or the gun. No man or country can hold a Bible in one hand and a gun in the other …’ [Hennacy] is a Christian Anarchist. Through penance and exposition, he is trying to do away with the atom bombs.” The Allen family, in Tucson, with their ten fine children, always had meetings for me when I came that way. Friends at the Arizona Ranch School had me talk to their boys. Father Fowler had me speak at <abbr>St.</abbr> Joseph’s Academy. Dick and Byrd Sweitzer, Tom Bahti and Elizabeth Baskette are fellow “Indian lover” friends of mine there, while Phil Burnham and Mike Cudihay always make me feel at home.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>The West Coast</h3>
				<p>Over the country it is tic-tac-toe as to where the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> is welcome and where it isn’t. In San Diego there is lots of Navy, and Bishop Buddy likes the Navy, so we can only speak in a home now and then, although I did speak at San Diego University to the class of a <abbr>prof.</abbr> who had been fired from a Catholic College because he had as reference some book, in his English class, that no one but a Jansenist would disapprove. Although, when I visited Frank Scully⁠—the man “who has one lung, one leg, and one idea: Frank Scully”⁠—an old time friend of Dorothy, he wrote a column about me in the San Diego diocesan paper. In Los Angeles, it was Cardinal McIntyre who told Dorothy that she was doing God’s work, and never to give it up. I spoke to a crowd there at the Little Theatre on June 9, 1954 (the saints day of two fine martyrs, Primus and Felician, who wouldn’t give in, although told by the soldiers that each one had weakened.) Father Bruscher introduced me here at Loyola, and I have spoken to Quakers and to small groups many times when I go to Pasadena to visit my daughter Sharon. At Stanford and Santa Clara, the Steinkes always arrange meetings for me, and many students are interested, despite the conservatism of the authorities.</p>
				<p>In San Francisco, years ago, Archbishop Mitty said that a Catholic can’t be a conscientious objector, so I visited Arthur Duffy and George Lillis⁠—doing a six months sentence because of the letter sent to court from the Chancery Office. Individual priests are friendly, here and there, and I have spoken in meetings at Catholic bookstores, and in private homes, and at <abbr>St.</abbr> Albert’s, the Dominician seminary in Oakland, in Berkeley at the Newman Club, and at Wheeler Hall at the University, and before Quaker and pacifist groups many times. I have spoken on <abbr class="initialism">KFPA</abbr> many times, and, for a time, I prepared a tape every two weeks here in <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> City of what I thought about the world and sent it to them, and they broadcast it. A most interesting meeting was at the Cloven Hoof, in the “beat” section. When I have finished getting acquainted with the Mormons around Salt Lake City, I plan to go to San Francisco for good, so I will be glad to see Vic and Emma Hauser, George Reeves, Warren <abbr class="name">K.</abbr> Billings, Gordon Koller, Byron Bryant, Bob Pickus, and their friends there, again.</p>
				<p>I had some fine meetings in the old gold rush country at Marysville, and a good write-up in the Yuba College paper there. Likewise in Corvallis and Eugene, in Oregon.</p>
				<p>Portland is the one town in the west where we are welcomed by Catholics, Quakers, and liberals. The Blanchet House, where 1,800 people a day are fed, was started by young college students awakened by the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. I spoke there in 1954, but in my two later visits, the leader was not interested in our radical philosophy for the men, but was cordial to me personally. At Catholic Portland University, three classes at Lewis and Clark, and two exciting meetings at Reed, and several Quaker meetings, I ran the whole gamut of possible questions. One cordial Jesuit priest heard me glve the very radical <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> position as I spoke to Quakers at the <abbr class="initialism">YWCA</abbr>. Wanting to pour oil on the troubled waters, he said:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>On the subject of pacifism, anarchism, and war, it could be that you are right and it could be that you are wrong; and it could be on these subjects that the Church is right, and it could be that the Church is wrong; isn’t that the way, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy?</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p><em>“No, I am right and the Church is wrong,”</em> and I added, “Father Feeny in Boston said that no one but a Catholic could go to Heaven. That is the line in Spain, but not in Boston, so he was excommunicated. On points of faith like Heaven, Hell, Purgatory, I will not argue; I accept what the Church teaches on Faith. But on being true to that radical Christ whom I found in solitary, I will obey Him rather than any Church authority.”</p>
				<p>Out at <abbr>Mt.</abbr> Angel, Mayanna Manion and her large famlly have always been our friends, and they plan meetings for us, and the good nuns there are our especial friends always, having us speak to their classes. Reuel Amder, young non-church anarchist, and John Little, school principal in the country, are our good friends for a long time.</p>
				<p>Seattle has an old <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> tradition, so I spoke one night for the “wobs” at Washington and Occidental, where men had been killed years ago to prove the right of free speech. I came as near being beaten by a drunk that night as I ever did. He was just drunk enough to be nasty. The Salvation Army was playing on an opposite corner, and this was old time “interference,” as the wobs would say. I spoke at a liberal Church of the People and at the Unitarian Church, and to small groups of pacifists in their homes. Velde (of the Un-American Activities Committee: a good name for them) was coming there soon, so a meeting at the University was cancelled. The hierarchy there seem to be afraid of us, although numerous priests are friendly. Our old friend Isobel MacRae always had a meeting for me, and Jean David, the French Professor who knew Peter, always greeted me gladly. Bob Casey, a union seaman who does not follow us all the way, but who takes my books in ports over the world, planned several meetings at forums there, in 1960. And the diocesan paper gave a fair write-up of what I believed in. My old friend Ed Lehmann, who fought in Spain, lives here, and June and Farrar Burn live way out in the Sound, on their island. Last time I stayed with Sue and Mike Miyake, Dorothy’s niece and her husband.</p>
				<p>I had spoken to a Catholic group, and a young priest got up and unmercifully denounced me as being devoid of any understanding of Christ’s teaching. I am not mad at any human being so far, and I am not going to start now being angry at a priest. I answered him firmly but kindly. The next day, he wrote the following letter to me, which was later printed in the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>I realize that after all you have been through you must be inured to most kinds of insults and misunderstandings of your character and aims. But I am afraid that what I said last night, that you don’t seem to go all out in accepting your Catholicism, might have cut into the sensitivity of even a man of such high ideals and contempt of human opinion as you are, since it was an accusation I don’t suppose you hear too often, and since it denies what you really are doing to your fullest capacity. If this was the case I hope you will accept my apology.</p>
					<p>I also hope that you will accept my congratulations. It takes more courage than most of us can muster to accept, with no compromise, what we know is the complete Spirit of Christ’s teaching. Christ didn’t think too much of those who insisted on the letter of the law but didn’t live the spirit. As you said last night, there must always be at least one to tell the emperor that he’s naked. Maybe others will try to shut him up or embarrassedly ignore him, but they are still glad that he did say it, and do not realize that there is still some hope for the survival of truth if there is at least one man living it. </p>
					<p>I will pray that God will continue to give you the grace to fulfill your mission of shocking men from their immersion in the letter of the law to a realization of the full spirit of Christ’s law, even if they can only live up to that spirit in a mediocre way. Since we are men, and not apples, one good man can make a whole barrel, the whole world better.</p>
					<p>Sincerely in Christ,</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Mountain States</h3>
				<p>In Spokane, Sister Bernice had me speak twice to teachers and students at her Marycliff High School. And at Gonzaga College, seminarians met me at the bus, and had me speaking about every waking minute at their college. Just one student who has nerve enough to speak up is enough to get a speaker to come to give the message and answer questions. I will not go to any group unless it is known ahead of time that I am an anarchist and a pacifist. If they are afraid of these words, they are not ready to think or to learn. I wouldn’t waste time on them.</p>
				<p>Brother Martin Gaines has a House of Charity, where he feeds many people and houses them. He is the “Lord’s beggar,” getting practically everything by asking for it from all kinds of people. He is a pacifist, a convert, who heard me in 1954 at <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s in Minnesota. We had a meeting also at a home of Catholic friends of his, and I spoke to the people at his house. I’ll be nearer him when I am in Salt Lake City, and count him as my good friend.</p>
				<p>A lone printer from Brooklyn takes the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> in Boise, Idaho, and he asked me to speak to a few friends at his home. This town, hid away in the mountains, reminds me of Santa Fe. I will have much more to write, if there is a second edition of my autobiography, about Salt Lake City, but I will begin now to tell you of my interest in the Mormons.</p>
				<p>In Phoenix, I noticed 3,000 Mormons going out on a Saturday to pick cotton for the Church. I had read the book of Mormon, and saw more blood in it, to a page, than is in our Old Testament. I had written to the heads of the Mormon Church, in the Second World War, and asked them if a Mormon could be a conscientious objector. The answer was “they could be, they wouldn’t get the idea around us.” There was a fellow by the name of Bryan in Springfield, <abbr class="postal">Mo.</abbr> prison as a conscientious objector who, it is said, was some kind of a Mormon. The Mormon Church has always been bloodthirsty and conservative, but in their early history, as told in books by Vardis Fisher and others, they had a “United Order,” and today they help each other rather than have the welfare state do it. They also tithe, and do not take collections in their churches. And their meetings are very interesting. I have good Mormon friends in Flagstaff and Tucson. When I was selling <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s at 43rd and Lexington, a woman told me of a Sister Mary Catherine, a Carmelite nun, whose folks were polygamists, and whose relatives are the Romneys, Apostles in the Church. I corresponded with her, and she read my book, and she reads the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>; and I visited her in Salt Lake City. A Jewish man by the name of Herbert Rona became a convert to the Mormons. An atheist gave him a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, and he wrote to us saying that he was a pacifist. He had me speak at his home and ex-<abbr>Gov.</abbr> Bracken Lee, LeGrande Richards (one of the 12 Apostles), Professor Bennion, and Judge Anderson⁠—all Mormons⁠—came to a meeting at Rona’s house where I explained my radical ideas. I also met a leader of the polygamous Mormons (who are out of the Church), and found that he was a pacifist, did not vote, and was a vegetarian. He had done time for having half a dozen wives and still has them.</p>
				<p>I also know radical priests in Salt Lake City. I like to work in orchards, so by the time you are reading this, I will be out there in farm and orchard work. How much of regular Mormon (or polygamous Mormon) is worthy, and how much is phony, you will hear about as I live among these good people. The Catholic Bishop, here, has been very conservative, for the right-to-work law, and outdoing the Mormons in being conservative⁠—at the same time subverting them by bingo, which Mormons are not allowed to indulge in. I do not know the attitude of the new Catholic Bishop.</p>
				<p>While I am living among the Mormons, I will do them the courtesy to abstain from tea or coffee, meanwhile fasting my regular day a week as penance.</p>
				<p>Ed Heustis is a union sympathizer in Anaconda, and a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> reader for years. He had me come there and, after some questioning by the local priest, I spoke at the Catholic Central High School. I would like to visit and speak in Butte, Helena, Billings, Deer Lodge, <abbr>etc.</abbr> later.</p>
				<p>Once I had thought of living in Denver for a time, but the conservatism of Catholics there does not appeal to me, and there is no especial attraction to that city. I have spoken to pacifists half a dozen times in their homes, and have gone to nearby Boulder to speak to Quakers. Cheyenne is the home of a wonderful woman with a wonderful family: <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Robert Leybourne. I had sold her sister a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> in Phoenix ten years ago, and she had bought one for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leybourne, and she had become one of the six subscribers in Wyoming. When I was fasting for 40 days in Washington <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr>, and picketing, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Leybourne thought that if I had been in Cheyenne, I would have been picketing the dedication of the missile base there, the next day, but I couldn’t do it, for I was busy in Washington. Someone ought to do it; maybe she ought to do it. So the next day, she takes her six children, and, four months pregnant with another, and shivering, they ride in their station wagon, saying “Hail Marys” the 30 miles to the missile base, where she parades with a sign saying “Missiles are for Murder.” The cops came, but she didn’t budge. She did not know that some Quakers and pacifists had planned to come there from other parts of the country and picket, and go to jail, so when they came, her home was the headquarters for activities. I visited her and the children⁠—one girl is named Dimity and another Felicity⁠—and I had a meeting of pacifists at her house. She introduced me to the Bishop, who knew of her activities and did not scold her. Her father had been an old time <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> and she is Irish, and I suppose that helps⁠—but she <em>did</em> the thing, while others talked or wrote letters to Washington, <abbr class="postal eoc">D.C.</abbr></p>
				<p>In Kansas City, Bob Hoyt, of the ill-fated Catholic daily, had me meet friends in a huge, antiquated stone house. These were all liberals, but they were cordial to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. In <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis, I have spoken several times, as I crossed the country, at the Catholic Center near the University, and always have had spirited meetings. The German influence of state worship is prevalent here, and our anarchist approach is not liked. Minneapolis and <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul have long been a center where the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> is popular among priests and students. Radical students at the University always plan a meeting for me; and also at the home of Orin Doty, who was in jail as a <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>; and at Maryhouse, where women live together and do charity work. A Baptist College greeted me gladly, but at the same time, the Sisters at a Catholic high school, who had invited me, even when I had been in Sandstone prison, reluctantly had to cancel the meeting, because the priest in control disliked us. The present Bishop in <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul denounced the coming of Khrushchev to this country, and does not seem to be as tolerant as his predecessor. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Wanderer</i> is a right-wing Catholic weekly that carried articles denouncing the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> and Dorothy, saying that she had gone to prison in Nevada demonstrating against the atom bomb. None of us went to prison there, and she had no part in that demonstration. I visited with the editor for half an hour and convinced him that, when his paper said “it is rumored that Dorothy Day is a communicant,” he was doing an injustice to a great and noble Catholic. (Later they had a long editorial against Dorothy and me, and our support of the Cuban revolution.) I have spoken three times at <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s Seminary, near <abbr>St.</abbr> Cloud, and have always had a good response from the students. The reporter in the <abbr>St.</abbr> Cloud paper printed an interview with me that showed a great understanding upon such a short acquaintance. <abbr class="name">J.F.</abbr> Powers, the short story writer, lives in <abbr>St.</abbr> Cloud, and I value visits with him. He and George Collins are the only two Catholics whom I know of that refused to register for the draft in World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. They did time in Sandstone prison. I spoke at Father Casey’s in Hutcheson, and later at Belle Plaine, and to the parishes of several radical priests in small Minnesota towns. I answered questions to a large group of seminarians at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s, in Winona. In Duluth, I met with the Finnish <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr> folks, who publish a daily paper. Across into Wisconsin, at Ashland, I was welcomed by a Jewish professor at Northland College, where I spoke to classes, and by John Chapple, a right-wing extremist long before the days of McCarthy, who is a Catholic convert, and friendly to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> for what might seem odd reasons. We disagreed on Russia but, it seems, had the same enemy: the welfare state.</p>
				<p>“Mamma, can that man who was in prison because he didn’t want the world blown up, sleep in my bed?” asked five-year-old Jeffry Lippink in Two Harbors, Minnesota, where I was speaking in their home the second night after my release from Sandstone prison.</p>
				<p>“Yes, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hennacy can sleep in your bed,” mother replied.</p>
				<p>“Then I’ll help ’gainst the war, won’t I?” Jeffry answered.</p>
				<p>In LaCrosse I had spoken at Viterbo College, in 1954, and at the Methodist Church, where my friend Winslow Wilson was pastor. He was the first one I heard of who refused to register for the draft in 1940. Although he was already exempt as a minister, and his wife was seven months pregnant, he refused to register, and got two years in Sandstone prison. I collected small sums and sent them to his wife. Later, he became a subscriber to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, and I have spoken to his folks several times. He is now superintendent of the district in Madison. I treasure knowing him and his fine family. In Milwaukee, I have spoken in journalism classes of Dean O’Sullivan’s, in their library, and across the street at Cardyn Center. Also, at the Newman Club, at what was formerly State Teacher’s College, but is now University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee. Also to small groups in houses, and always to my Communist friends, under the auspices of their leader, Fred Basset Blair. There is not much of a pacifist grouping now among Protestants there, but I spoke to them once, since becoming a Catholic.</p>
				<p>Friends in the Ford Foundation wanted us to apply for a grant, saying that we could receive money each year for five years, with no strings. Dorothy wrote, refusing any of their money, as it was “blood money,” being taken from the workers. She remembered the first president of the Ford Local, who was beaten by Ford thugs. Now of course, Ford, and even Rockefeller, are respectable. But the point is, they are not sorry they are a part of the war system and capitalist exploitation. About the same time, a man from Massachusetts wrote that he wanted to send the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> some money, but he was a tax man, and perhaps Hennacy wouldn’t like it. I wrote to him, saying that if <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter and <abbr>St.</abbr> Andrew had a day off from preaching, they could go back to their old job, which was fishing, but <abbr>St.</abbr> Matthew couldn’t go back to his old job⁠—that of being a tax man, for it was wicked. Now, if this man could continue being a tax man, unlike <abbr>St.</abbr> Matthew, then he should give his money to the Bishops and <abbr>St.</abbr> Vincent de Paul⁠—they were not particular, but we were. If he was sorry he was a tax man, and as a penance wanted to give us something, we would take it. We didn’t get it. I told this to Father George Dunne, a Jesuit, and he said I would make a good Jesuit. And I mentioned it at Marquette, and Dean O’Sullivan said that the Jesuits would have gotten the money.</p>
				<p>When Bishop Meyer was in Milwaukee, I was not allowed to speak openly in churches or in societies having a Chaplain; but in 1960, when Bishop Cousins came from Peoria, and was Bishop in Milwaukee, I was allowed to speak both at the Cardyn Center, where I had a meeting for many hours, and at <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis Seminary, where I met the President and answered questions from the students for hours.</p>
				<p>Of course, in Chicago, Nina Polcyn, of <abbr>St.</abbr> Benet’s book store, always welcomes us. I spoke at the University of Chicago, and to Quakers and small radical groups, but not to any churches, or to Catholic colleges. The <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> here works closely with other pacifists. The new Bishop in Peoria canceled my meeting as being “too controversial.” I spoke at the Universalist Church. At Notre Dame, I had spoken at the home of <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Willis Nutting, and to a small meeting at the University Library, sponsored by Father Leo Ward. In 1960, he had me speak at a larger meeting there, and the next day, to his classes and those of another professor. One student quoted Christ chasing the money changers out of the temple, and wondered what I thought about it. I said that if He came back <em>here</em>, He sure would upset some of the plush around <em>here</em>. I was pleased to meet <abbr>Prof.</abbr> O’Brien, head of the teaching of courses in criminology. He had formerly been head of all the prisons in Indiana. We did not disagree as much as one might think. In Bloomington, some students had me speak at a luncheon, informally. Someone at the next table heard part of my conversation, and gave a garbled account of it next day in the college paper.</p>
				<p>I had been through Indianapolis many times but did not know anyone there, until a young priest from Purdue had me speak at Marian College to several classes of students. All of the priests I met were cordial except one, who said he would not have allowed me in his diocese if he were Bishop. He said that a true Catholic should obey his Bishop, who was “Christ on earth,” regarding a “just” war, and even if the Bishop was wrong, the sin would be upon the Bishop and not upon the one who took error as being truth. I had not heard this echo from the Middle Ages for some time.</p>
				<p>At Joe Zarella’s, in Tell City, <abbr class="postal">Ind.</abbr>, I met cordial priests from <abbr>St.</abbr> Meinrad’s. At Purdue University, I had as fine a welcome as I have received from a Newman Club. Here three young priests work with the students. At a Communion breakfast, and later with a tape recording for the local radio, I was able to help their fine young folks realize something about “Christ the revolutionist.”</p>
				<p>In my home state of Ohio, I am always busy speaking to colleges. Antioch College is radical, and at my first visit, the Catholic priest in the town was very cordial. My meeting with the students here is always interesting, for they are intelligent and full of questions. The Catholic students have had the idea of fighting Communists without knowing what it is all about. I met with them alone. The College Record said, “Whether his doctrines are right is largely immaterial. But the man is right, and therefore dangerous, because of the way he treats his opinions. He makes issues out of them. He heckles bureaucrats. … For all I know, Hennacy may have found a teammate or two this weekend. At any rate, if President Gould meant what he said last fall⁠—‘let me say as strongly as I know how that there are no subversive activities at Antioch,’ then somebody outfoxed the President. Tartly candid, unreconstructed Ammon Hennacy is a subversive activity. And his subversiveness is both impossible and disreputable for a court or prison to combat, let alone a college …”</p>
				<p>I spoke at Oberlin College to a large meeting. Forty years before, I had put out anti-draft literature on their campus. I have always been welcome at the Grail, where these fine girls learn the homemaking arts. In Columbus, my especial friend is <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Mitchell, who founded a home for spastics, later turning it over to an Order. He had me speak to them, and introduced me around the Chancery office. The Bishop was away that day. The good Doctor had written and published booklets at his own expense favoring McCarthy, and had come to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> giving us money for helping the poor “but not for that radical Hennacy.” I became acquainted with him and, although we disagree on some things, we each appreciate the integrity of the other. On the 5th of April, 1947, I spoke to the Newman Club at Ohio State University, there. This was exactly 40 years from the night I had been arrested for opposing World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. In Cleveland, I spoke at the Unitarian Church, one night, while a meeting of <abbr>Gov.</abbr> de Salle’s Democrats was supposed to be going on, but they were late, so the Democrats came in and wanted to know what this “anarchist-no-voting” meant.</p>
				<p>I have spoken to Father Hugo in Pittsburgh several times on the phone, but have never met him. Now that my friend Bishop Wright is in Pittsburgh, I hope to visit that city more and more. In Philadelphia, I have spoken several times to the Quaker colleges, and at Pendle Hill. Also, to a coffee house of my friend Bill Basnight. At the Christian Brothers’ La Salle College, I was introduced to a huge meeting of students by the Brother who said, “This man has been cleared; this man has been cleared.” The students had signs like at a political convention saying “Welcome Ammon Hennacy.” They asked stimulating questions for hours, afterwards. That night, I met with professors and friends until 2 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr>, among them John Stokes, former conscientious objector, and now a wealthy manufacturer and Catholic convert. Later, I spoke to his conservative Catholic friends at his home. He has developed Mary’s Gardens, offering seeds and flowers named for Our Lady.</p>
				<p>In Washington <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr>, I spoke to <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter Claver House, and to small groups of students attending Catholic University, friends of Peggy Reeves. In Lancaster, <abbr class="postal">Pa.</abbr>, I spoke twice, being invited by Kitty Shenk, a former Catholic, but now a Unitarian, who had me speak at her church, and to Catholic groups; and also to the Evangelical and Reformed Seminary. The college paper said the next day: “Anarchist fascinates, bewilders.” I also played Hopi records and spoke to the children of the “hook and eye” Amish in their school. They looked at me, puzzled, for their founder was Jacob Ammon. Friends in the local York paper had me speak to Catholics and others there. One stormy night, I spoke to students at the Lutheran Muhlenberg College at Allentown, <abbr class="postal">Pa.</abbr>; and another time, at Drew University in New Jersey. I spoke to the Newman Club and to an economics seminar at Rutgers before being invited to speak at an assembly, dressed in a gown. I spoke at Cornell, but the Catholics were abashed at my radicalism, the other students being more cordial. In Rochester, at the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> house, I spoke to small groups several times.</p>
				<p>In Canada, I visited for a few days with Tony Walsh, at his Labre House in Montreal, and was introduced by Murray Ballantine when I spoke. I become acquainted with Karl Stern, the psychiatrist, whose book <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pillar of Fire</i> I had read years before I became a Catholic. In it, he said that when he joined the Church, he brought with him “all that was good from Gandhi and Tolstoy.” I also visited the Little Sisters of Charles de Foucauld, who work in factories and live among the poor. Later I met women of their group in Chicago and Washington, <abbr class="postal eoc">D.C.</abbr> They are not as radical as we are, but they understand and are sympathetic. I spoke to a small meeting of the Newman Club at McGill University, staying at the home of a Quaker, David Kirk, whose wife had the same great-great-⁠—grandfather as I on my mother’s side. They have adopted several children of varying nationalities. Going on to Combermere, I visited a day at Catherine De Heuck’s headquarters, and spoke to those living there. A young Belgian seminarian invited me to speak to the White Fathers in Ottawa. They are missionaries who work in North Africa. I was surprised to receive a letter from the Father in charge, later, appreciating my visit, for I had not thought that my extreme radicalism would go over there. Later, the young Belgian, now a priest, stopped at the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> on the way to his field. The next day, I spoke to students at the University Seminary in Ottawa, and this being the Pope’s birthday, they had the day off, so I was busy answering questions every minute.</p>
				<p>In Sudbury, Ontario, I was guest of Vicky Smits, a young housewife who emigrated with her husband Joe Holland nine years ago. Joe works at the Frood-Stoble unit, where he blasts 700 tons every eight hours. The shoemaker says there is nothing like leather. Here, the nickel center of the world, there is nothing like nickel. The big name there is <abbr class="acronym">INCO</abbr> (International Nickel Company of Canada.) Another name that also looms big on the horizon of Sudbury Basin, of the 130,000 acres where John Foster Dulles was once Chairman of the Board of <abbr class="acronym">INCO</abbr>, is Local 598 of the Mine, Mill, and Smelter Workers, established in 1943 after a score of years of lockouts and violence, and now numbering 14,000 workers. There are at least thirty nationalities in this growing town, which is not far from the uranium mines at Blind River and the gold mines at Virginia. In this latter town, until recently, native-born Canadians received the highest wage, then immigrants, then Indians, all doing the same work. When the union convention was held in Sudbury, recently, the Chamber of Commerce aroused dissident racial minorities against “the Commie union” and picketed the union hall. My hostess, Vicki, picketed the pickets with a sign: “Our Leaders are Tops.”</p>
				<p>My visit was complicated somewhat by the situation of 70% of the members of this left-wing union being Catholic, and of the opposition to the union from all the clergy, both Catholic and Protestant. Vicki had planned my schedule, as she had lived in different parishes and knew several priests. First I spoke to a group of men employed by <abbr class="acronym">INCO</abbr> who were anti-Communist, at <abbr>St.</abbr> Anne’s Church. Father Regimbault there disliked both capitalism and communism, and like Father Murphy and Father Kaptean, with whom I spoke later, believed in unions. That night, and at a Communion breakfast on <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s Day at the same Church where I answered questions for hours, it was difficult for them to gain an understanding of the pacifist anarchist ideal, as they had the idea that anarchists and radicals acted like a goon-squad from Mine Mill that had beaten up a Steelworker organizer brought in to rival Mine Mill. I tried to bring the message that, as the Quakers reply to the assertion that you can’t trust Communists: “No one said we should trust Communists, for we should trust God and love the Communists.” I tried to arrange a meeting between priests and the heads of the Mine Mill. The union men were willing, but the priests would not talk to nonbelievers. The clergy had tried to prevent the showing of <i epub:type="se:name">Salt of the Earth</i>, the story of a strike at Silver City, <abbr class="postal">N.M.</abbr>, and had told Catholics that they could not receive Communion if they sent their children to the summer camp of the union. The Church did not provide any summer camp for the children in this desolate area, where the copper fumes kill nearly all vegetation. I visited the camp with Weir Reed, the camp director.</p>
				<p>On a tour of the smelter at Copper Cliff, I saw as much as a visitor is permitted to see: the mixing ore and its roasting in the gas oven. The fumes did not allow us to go very near the room where the refuse was being skimmed off, or near the kilns where men entered to clean out the accumulated sooty refuse. The guide said that his brother had refused to go in a kiln when it was too hot, for he had already had an ear burned, but the foreman went in, and to escape the heat had madly rushed out and fallen several stories, and was killed. Helmets, boots with steel over the toes, aprons and gloves, and gas masks cannot always prevent a splash of metal from injuring workers. Some mining is a mile underground.</p>
				<p>I was in Arizona when <i epub:type="se:name">Salt of the Earth</i> was being filmed at Silver City, <abbr class="postal">N.M.</abbr>, and I sent money to help the women pickets. The injunction was against the men, so the women picketed, and finally won the strike. The film was not allowed a public showing in most of the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr>, so I despaired of seeing it. Reid ran the picture, with me as an audience of one. Jencks, who played an important part in the film, is currently being hounded by the authorities, not because he may have signed a non-Communist affidavit falsely, but because he put up such a great fight against those who make wars and profit out of wars. The picture showed that it was radicals who were brave enough to be beaten up and to organize unions when the going was hard. I spoke to a meeting of the union, where I met old time <abbr class="initialism">I.W.W.</abbr>’s. To both Communist and Catholic audiences I say, “In Russia and the Iron Curtain Countries the enemy of the free worker is the bureaucrat and the Communist; in this country the enemy of the worker is the bureaucrat and the capitalist.” I spoke also to a group of women, the auxiliary of the local Lions Club, and to enthusiastic students at Sacred Heart College.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Speaking Tour 1961</h3>
				<p>Leaving New York City, January 2nd, I spoke to a group at the Catholic University of America, gathered together by Father Robert Hovda. I visited with my friend Bob Hoyt, of the Knight newspapers. He attended the new Catholic Church at McLean, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>, built like that in Holyoke, <abbr class="postal">Mass.</abbr>, in a circular manner, with built-in, plate glass, soundproof rooms for women with crying babies … the priest here, along with most I met in or near Washington, was not a bit interested in social problems, least of all in my radical approach to them. Bob’s young boy had been told about my being a vegetarian and working a garden the year around in Arizona, and proudly showed me some plants he had set out in their small garden.</p>
				<p>Several times, when I had been fasting in and around Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr>, I had my last meal with Bob and his boss, Ed Leahy. This consisted of onion soup, in the National Press Club restaurant. Ed had written up episodes of my argument with the tax man in the string of Knight newspapers over the country, stressing in a humorous way that I was still fighting windmills, and the tax man did not seem to know what to do about it! “The Bureau of Internal Revenue in Washington doesn’t like to be asked about Hennacy. A spokesman declares that the case of the Phoenix non-taxpayer has not come to their attention at the main office. But if Hennacy’s writing arm holds out, they’re going to have to put him on the docket eventually.”</p>
				<p>I had a standing-room-only session at the big Unitarian Church across from the Mormon Church, and met with a small group of pacifists also. I also met with some <abbr class="initialism">AFL-CIO</abbr> officials, and was glad to meet <abbr class="name">I.F.</abbr> Stone, whose dynamic weekly debunks much that goés on in this city of politicians. I always visit Stewart Udall and some of his liberal Democratic Congressman friends; Senator Gene McCarthy; and Ed Leahy and Bob Hoyt, of the Knight Newspapers.</p>
				<p>A lively group connected with <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Ballard’s Naturalist Vegetarian Church in Baltimore was something new for me. Then I went to Philadelphia and addressed a Quaker Day School, after which Patricia Rusk drove me back to Baltimore for a small meeting at Goucher College. An exceedingly interesting meeting at <abbr>St.</abbr> Johns University at Annapolis showed me that I should have planned a stay of two days there in order to answer all of the questions propounded by those freewheeling minds. A teacher drove me hurriedly to Woodstock Seminary where the seminarian Czyparek, our friend from New York City, tramped with me to a cabin in the woods, where, before a huge fire of logs, we discussed radical ideas for hours. It had taken several years of speaking a few words, as I was selling <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s at 14th Street, before this seminarian finally became an enthusiastic <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> fan.</p>
				<p>Mike Strasser obligingly met me at 4 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> at the bus in Pittsburgh, and I spoke to a group where Eddie Egan teaches philosophy in a Catholic school. Father Rice, who picketed with us in the Depression, spoke to me on the phone, and the priests at <abbr>St.</abbr> Vincents at Latrobe came and got me for a large meeting. One student had made a bet that he could get me angry, so when the time for questions came, he insulted me and dared me to hit him. I told him to come up and strike the first blow and then I would turn my cheek for the second blow. Later we were good friends, when he told me of the wager. Their school paper had a good writeup of the meeting.</p>
				<p>Russ Gibbons, secretary of a national group of Catholics interested in civil liberties, had planned meetings for me at Rosary Hill College, to a Newman Club at another college and to the Knights of Columbus in the suburb of Hamburg. I was challenged by questions from many who had never heard the radical message before. Nicole d’Entremont gave a very good account of my ideas in their paper <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Ascent</i>. And at the <abbr class="initialism">K</abbr> of <abbr class="initialism">C</abbr> meeting, the head of the Democratic party in Buffalo, an Irishman by the name of Crotty, exchanged witticisms with me, in all good humor.</p>
				<p>I had been invited by a student to speak at one of the two seminaries in the world established by the Popes, the one in Worthington, Ohio, outside of Columbus, but some minor official there became frightened and cancelled it. The student appealed to the head priest, and he knew of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, and said it would be good to liven them up with a few unorthodox ideas. I never saw so many red sashes outside of a May Day parade. I told them that there was little opportunity in their closed world for them to know what was going on. That I was part of a revolutionary movement like that of the early Christians, and that God had sent me to make sure that they didn’t go asleep on their job. That what I said was going to get worse, so they had better play sick and leave if they couldn’t take it. Although the questions are nearly always the same, as given in <a href="chapter-19.xhtml">my chapter on questions and answers</a>, they came fast and furious at this meeting. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Bill Mitchell, my McCarthyite friend from Columbus, took me to his home after the meeting.</p>
				<p>In Chillicothe I visited my old time friends where they now lived on a farm. Two priests of the Glenmary Order of Home missioners, who had corresponded with me, came over for the evening and invited me to speak to their Order near Cincinnati, where also some nuns came to the meeting. Then I had a day in Portsmouth with my old pal of Atlanta prison days, <abbr>Fr.</abbr> John Dunn, and went on to Cincinnati, where I visited my brother Frank and spoke to a meeting of Quakers and Peacemakers. I was glad to see my friend Maurice McCracken again, who had been deposed from his Presbyterian ministry for not paying taxes for war. And, of course, Ernie Bromley and family, leading Peacemakers. A new group of girls were at the Grail, where I spoke to them at length.</p>
				<p>I have always found a welcome at Antioch College, and visited at the home of a pacifist who refused to pay his income tax, so his $9,000 home was sold by the tax man for the around $500 tax that he owed. No one else bid on his house, so he bought it back, and of course paid the taxes. Earlham College, at Richmond, <abbr class="postal">Ind.</abbr>, had invited me to speak, but cancelled the meeting. This is a Quaker College that has <abbr class="initialism">R.O.T.C.</abbr>, so I did not expect much from them. I arrived at Purdue in the midst of exams, so only met a few students, and had a meeting at the home of a Catholic family. <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Frazee, at Marian College in Indianapolis, greeted me gladly, and I answered questions practically all day as the students crowded around. One student had heard me answer the same question three times, so the fourth time it came up, he answered it boldly before I could get a word in. The Athletic coach wanted me to tell the teachers at the table at lunch about my fasting and being a vegetarian. He said he had a difficult time getting them to walk short distances, rather than riding in cars. Again, in Milwaukee, I spoke at Marquette University and to the Cardyn Center nearby, and visited many old time friends. And of course, at the Catholic Center at the University in Madison I am always welcome. Likewise, at the University of Minnesota; and at the homes of pacifists I had interesting meetings.</p>
				<p>I arrived at midnight in Winnipeg, and was met by a young Catholic who put me up at a downtown hotel. This is the only city in North America where the Communists have members of the City Council and the school board. In these Provinces, the government furnishes the buildings near the regular University for the Catholics and for the Church of England, and they pay a small token rent and teach their religion, philosophy, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> They make no effort to compete with the regular College in the physical sciences. I was busy all day with meetings. Father Forsythe drove me downtown to the Communist Party headquarters, where I introduced myself. A young Communist vegetarian was eating his lunch and invited me to eat with him. Later I met the Communist officials, and told them of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Parochial Schools</h3>
				<p>This reminds me of the whole idea of aid to parochial schools here in the United States, where there is supposed to be a separation of Church and State. When Al Smith ran for President, he said, but to little avail, that he believed in the Catholics running their own schools without the help of the state. President Kennedy ran on the same platform. Until his election, the National Catholic Welfare Conference, the spokesman for the Church, did not have the nerve to come out and ask for money from the state. It is well known that, outside of Cardinal Cushing, most of the hierarchy are so conservative that they would rather have a wishy-washy man like Nixon as President, than a liberal. And it was this kind of Catholic in Congress who killed the President’s effort to help the public schools. Catholics say that it is unfair for them to pay taxes for public schools and then pay for their own parochial schools. This is no more unfair than to make a bachelor to support big families of children. Nor than here in Utah, where no Mormon in good standing is on relief, for the Mormon Church takes care of their own; Mormons pay a tithe for this and also taxes to feed the Gentiles. If Catholics would lay off their gambling, drinking, and smoking they could have enough to run their schools. The following is from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Time</i> magazine of August 25, 1961:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p><abbr>Msgr.</abbr> George W. Casey, 65, is a Boston Irish Catholic who looks on the folklore of Boston Irish Catholics just about the way that a small boy with a pin looks on a cluster of balloons. In his lively column for the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Pilot</i>, weekly newspaper of the Boston archdiocese, Father Casey has lampooned South Boston’s “convivial, congenital, incurable” Irish for boozing it up on <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s Day, criticized parish priests for being “tyrants,” and even suggested that nuns wear modern clothes⁠—all to howls of Hibernian protest.</p>
					<p>Last week, Columnist Casey’s latest shock was front-page news in Boston. He blandly urged <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Catholics to abandon parochial grade schools and concentrate instead on high schools and colleges. “Since it is quite clear by now that Catholic schools are not going to get any financial aid from the federal government.” Father Casey argued, “We should move our resources to the front of greatest challenge.” Casey challenged the assumption that primary grades are the best time and place to carry out the chief mission of Catholic schools, “preservation of the faith.” While “neatness, sanitation, table, manners and so on can be ingrained in these early years, it is not evident that doctrine and abstract ideas can be.” More important are the crucial years of high school: “Let us have priests and the Sisters around in the grades where boy meets girl, and where both meet the Reformation, the Inquisition, Communism, Darwinism, Freudianism, and all the other religions and philosophies. They are much more needed there than where the boys and girls meet spelling, times tables, and long division.”</p>
					<p>Sending Catholic children to public schools, argued Casey, will help “avoid most of the less pleasant byproducts of separation and inbreeding.” Moreover, “we will all be relieved of the financial strain that so distorts our devotions and parish programs. The parishes will not have to erect the enormous bingo signs that disfigure all the church lawns in certain areas, or run a lot of novenas for palpably profit motives. Sunday Mass will not take on the quality of a fly trap designed to hold the people until three collections are taken up.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>In Saskatoon, the Catholic lady with whom I had corresponded for years had to be out of town for some weeks, so my contract was with the Doukhobors. Koozma Tarasoff had visited Russia and asked a Greek Orthodox priest about conscientious objectors and received the reply that he didn’t know anything about them, and besides, all Christians should fight for their country. He had met some Doukhobors who had picketed against militarism and had been sent to Siberia for a year. When they returned they lived in a colony with other Doukhobors. The understanding being, with the government, that if they kept by themselves they would not be bothered for military service. They told Koozma that they would like some of the “wild” Doukhobors of Canada to come and picket, and go to jail, and liven them up. My friend <abbr class="name">A.J.</abbr> Muste met Baptist pacifists who had done alternative service in Moscow. How many were killed during the Stalin regime, there is no means of knowing.</p>
				<p>Here, in the vicinity of Saskatoon, thousands of Doukhobors lived in the early 1900s. They were persecuted, and many fled to British Columbia. Now thousands of them live in a prosperous manner, own individual farms, sing their songs, and practice their religion, which might be described as similar to pacifist Unitarians, but with the Russian tradition. I spoke at an annual dinner they had, and happened to sit next to a young couple who lived up to the non-smoking, vegetarian ideal of the early Doukhobors. Outside of my talk, which was revolutionary, the tone seemed to be to be a part of the Canadian culture. I also spoke at a meeting in one of the Doukhobor meeting houses, where the older folks came on a Sunday afternoon. I addressed a meeting of liberals on pacifism and anarchism, and had a small meeting with students at the University. Koozma is now married and lives in Vancouver, and has written a 1,000 page book on the history of the Doukhobors. He is getting his <abbr class="initialism">M.A.</abbr> degree there.</p>
				<p>In Edmonton, <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Rose of the English Department welcomed me, and he had planned with the Christian Student Council to sponsor meetings which were well attended; and good reports in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Gateway</i>, the student paper, followed, especially one by Bentley LeBaron who analyzed my ideas as (1) individualism, (2) intelligence, (3) spiritual power, (4) pacifism, describing my ideas more coherently than I did, I expect. I also spoke at the Unitarian Church. Looking at the map, it is not so far to Fairbanks, Alaska, and sometime I hope to be invited to speak there. I had corresponded with Jim Milord, who teaches at Hobbema, on an Indian Reservation fifty miles south of Edmonton, so I was glad to spend a couple of days with him and his charming family. These Indians have oil royalties which have demoralized them. I listened to a speech contest, and made friends with a young health-minded Indian boy.</p>
				<p>I spent a week with Helen Demoskoff, Pete Maloff, and other Doukhobor friends. I visited Doukhobors in Grand Forks, where a Russian paper is printed, and was greeted kindly by the editor, who reads the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>.</p>
				<p>In Spokane, my friend Brother Martinat, at his House of Charity, took me 35 miles to the top of a mountain which a Catholic <abbr>Msgr.</abbr> had bought for him, this being a 500-acre tract where alcoholics from the city could build shacks, raise their food, and be so far away from a saloon that they stood a chance of reforming. We tramped for half a day midst magnificent pines, over streams, and to the high plateau where there is room for 100 cabins or more. In this society, that is the only way to help the alcoholic, for if he is in the midst of temptation, he will generally succumb, and drag down with him his weak friends. I spoke to a whole gymnasium full of boys who were anxious to get out and play. I only had fifteen minutes, but I made one of the best speeches of my life. I suppose it was the challenge of these kids, and the short time at hand, that made me do my best. Due to a misunderstanding, I was not able to make the meeting at Carroll College, at Helena.</p>
			</section>
			<section epub:type="subchapter">
				<h3>Salt Lake City</h3>
				<p>Arriving here on April 6th. I thought I would look around and see what the prospects might be for work when I came back in May. I went on the bus a few miles north to the town of Bountiful, but found very few people at home. Then I realized that this was the 131st anniversary of the founding of the Mormon Church, and that most people were at the semiannual conference in Salt Lake City. I got a few leads for work, later, and after three hours of knocking on doors, I came to the Stake Farm, where Mormons in that vicinity produced milk for the needy. I asked if there was any work I could do, and I was put to work digging post holes and setting posts for the next seven hours. Men were coming and going, putting in as much time as they had in repairing a chicken house. A young married woman lived in a cottage. Her husband had lost his job because of illness, and so he was employed at a nominal wage on the farm, and the rent was charged up to them, to be paid when he got regular work. I spoke later to the wife of the farm manager, and she was very critical of high-up Mormons. She told me of a “good Mormon” up the road, whom I contacted when my work was done. He had a chicken ranch and cherry orchard, and told me if I was back here in cherry picking time, he would have work for me. He had gone away from Mormon country, when he was young, for 15 years, but now was back for good. He had seen the world, and did not think much of it. In May, Mary and I were taken by a contractor to pick cherries at his place, and I was glad to meet him again. <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Wormuth, of the Political Science Department at the University, whom I had met while selling <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s at the New School in New York City a few years before, invited me to speak to his class. He told me that, of the 50 students, all were Mormons but three. I told them of being bothered by the <abbr class="initialism">KKK</abbr> when teaching in Alabama; that there were three sides to a question: your side, my side, and the right side; and kidded them about the Mormons giving up polygamy in 1890 when it cost them money. I had a barrage of questions, and, to my surprise, half a dozen young men came up and thanked me for opening up new ideas to them. The next day, Bishop Neal Maxwell, of the Mormon Church, who had been in the room and heard me, asked me to tape a record, for his television program, of all of my radical ideas. I said that surely he did not want all this radicalism, and he replied that Mormons were supposed to search for the truth, and if I had more or less of it, it would be good for the students. The tape was played later, twice, when I was in New York City. I bought a typewriter and work clothes, stored them with a pacifist friend, and hurried back to New York City, to perhaps be arrested for refusing, for the seventh time, to take part in the air raid drill; but, as related elsewhere, I was not arrested.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
