<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 13</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter13" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 13</h2>
                                <h3>Jails and Picketing</h3>
				<h3>1961⁠–⁠1964</h3>
                                <h4>New York City–Los Vegas, <abbr class="postal">Nev.</abbr>–Cape Canaveral, <abbr class="postal">Fla.</abbr>–Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr>–Omaha–Sandstone Prison–Polaris in <abbr class="postal">Conn.</abbr></h4>
			</header>
                        <p>The only place I was bothered was at 43 and Lexington where I was told I had to have a license. I explained to the cop that the Jehovah’s Witnesses had settled this in the Supreme Court years ago, but he didn’t believe me, and took me to the police station and then to the magistrate’s court on 2nd <abbr>Ave.</abbr> near the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> where the judge released me on my own name for a few weeks. (The night before Dorothy and I had been walking along that street and she said, “there’s the jail.” I said I didn’t care, but the next day I was in it.) Patricia Rusk, an ex—airplane hostess who then lived with us, came along to help me sell <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s daily, and the next Friday at 43 and Lexington another policeman tried to stop me but I talked him out of it. The next Friday Bertha Tisius and Eileen Fantino stood on the east side of the street and I took my accustomed place at the pillar at the entrance of the Peerless stores. Dorothy was to come also, but she was late. I told the girls jokingly that if they got pinched first I would call the office and if I got pinched first they should call the office. They were talking and faced away from me while the cop of the first encounter grabbed me and took me to the police station. When Dorothy came and wanted to know where I was they waited and looked around and finally called the police station, whereupon Dorothy stood at my usual place and sold the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> the rest of the afternoon, saying, “Ammon Hennacy, one of our editors, was just jailed for selling the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>; buy the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Catholic Worker</i>.” And along comes the atheist anarchist Jackson MacLow and helps with the sales.</p>
                        <p>The American Civil Liberties Union wanted me to be the guinea pig to prove free speech for the Democrats, Republicans, Socialists, and Communists who moved on when a cop told them to. So I deferred my anarchistlc principles for them and allowed Emanuel Redfield, a friendly Wall Street lawyer, to appear in court with me and plead not guilty for me. The judge would not listen to any argument for free speech and told my lawyer to appeal the case if he wanted to, giving me a $10 fine or five days in jail. Patricia was in court and visited me in my cell with Mr. Redfield wondering why I did not pay the fine for I could get it back again but could not get the five days back. I explained that I would never voluntarily give the government any money.</p>
                        <p>We jostled in the prison wagon up to the Tombs which is near the City Hall. After a time I was lodged in Lower D12 with Dan, in for drunkeness, who had bought a bottle of liquor when he cashed his $55 Lackawanna check and had been rolled. Now he was picking up butts. I offered to buy him a package of cigarettes from the trusty but he said they charged 50¢ after lock up and it was better to buy Bull Durham when the regular commissary wagon came around the next day, so I gave him a quarter. One aged Jew got ten days for selling pretzels on Wall Street without a license (and the city won’t give you a license). He had not learned yet to pay off the cops. We were fed on trays which were pushed into our cells. There was a runway where in the daytime we could walk back and forth. In the morning my name was called “for Rikers,” which meant for Rikers Island, part of the men’s prison. As we lined up in the outside corridor a screw with a cigar in his mouth yelled out our names, but his articulation was thus impeded; few could understand what he was saying. It seems he was an educated man for he used seven lettered words instead of four lettered ones as he shouted, “Get in the ⸻  line you ⸻  bums.”</p>
                        <p>Again we were packed in the wagon and jostled to 134th street where we were not permitted to leave our smoke filled vehicle for the breezes on the ferry. About 150 of us sat on benches in the big receiving room at Rikers Island and were counted and recounted and finger printed. We all stood naked and all body openings were examined, supposedly for dope which we might smuggle in. The wine sores on the old men, the stooped and broken bodies of many, presented a sorry specacle compared to the beautiful shiny black bodies of the Negroes among us, for there was no segregation here. We all took chances that the clothing handed us would fit. Most of us were short timers who went to Dorm 8 in the workhouse division.</p>
                        <p>My number was 419327 and Emil had the number next to mine. He had done 30 days for drinking and had only been out a few days and by some miracle of police inefficiency only drew five days this time for being caught in a doorway drinking from a bottle. Emil is a counterman and swears that in the future he will stick to beer, for this he can take, but not whisky. After he had done his thirty days he went to the blood bank but his blood was too thin to be taken. In this dormitory there were upper and lower bunks. I had a top one, and as is the custom in these modern jails there were no mattresses, only springs and several blankets and sheets. The man on the bottom bunk told of bits he had done and of the corruption of the police and of the regular payoff to them.</p>
                        <p>Marching from Dorm 8 at the far side of the workhouse with about 150 inmates we came at 5:30 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> to the main building where there are eight or more three-story cell blocks where those live who are doing from one to three years in maximum custody. We marched two by two and when I saw through the glass door the dining room full of convicts hunched over their aluminum plates eating their meagre fare in assembly line speed, tears of rage and pity choked me. This was the first time I had been in jail for 35 years. Was this all that our boasted civilization meant? I remembered what Tolstoy had said when he had first gone to Paris and saw an execution by guillotine and he had then started on the thought which led him to be a “Tolstoyan:” “There is no such thing as progress in the world,” he felt, if this was all that man could do to man. And again these immortal lines from Edwin Markham’s, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:poem">Man With the Hoe</i>, that I had recited hundreds of times in solitary in Atlanta years ago, came back to me:</p>
                        <blockquote><p>
                        <span>Down all the caverns of hell to their last gulf</span><br />
                        <span>There is no shape more terrible than this;</span><br />
                        <span>More tongued with censure of the world’s blind greed;</span><br />
                        <span>More filled with signs and portents for the soul,</span><br />
                        <span>More packed with danger to the universe…</span><br />
                        <span>Through this dread shape humanity betrayed,</span><br />
                        <span>Plundered, profaned and disinherited</span><br />
                        <span>Cries protest to the Powers that made the world;</span><br />
                        <span>A protest that is a prophecy…</span><br />
                        <span>O master, lords and rules of all lands</span><br />
                        <span>Is this the handiwork you give to God…</span><br />
                        <span>How will the future reckon with this man</span><br />
                        <span>How answer his brute question in that hour</span><br />
                        <span>When whirlwinds of rebellion shake all shores</span><br />
                        <span>How will it be with kingdoms and with kings</span><br />
                        <span>With those who shape him to the thing he is</span><br />
                        <span>When this dumb terror shall arise to judge the world</span><br />
                        <span>After the silence of the centuries?</p>
                        </blockquote>
                        <p><em>“Don’t go away mad. Just go away.”</em> This is the sign as you enter and leave this House of Correction. By the most visionary use of the word no one would suggest that anyone is ever “corrected” there. For from the time you are told not to smoke by a guard who takes a cigarette out of his mouth to tell you to get in the ⸻  line until your fingerprint is taken the second time as you leave there, there is nothing but the assembly line of the “count” and changing of the guards. It took us from 8 to 10 to get checked and rechecked and about 75 of us left on the ferry Tuesday morning with the usual seven lettered word thrown at us by the screw. Emil accompanied me to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> where we were welcomed by Murray Kempton of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">New York Post</i> who wrote in his column the next day on the contrast of McCarthyite Catholics and us at the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. A Monsignor Martin had complained at a Communion breakfast here in New York City that $5,000,000 had been raised to fight McCarthy “solely because of his Catholic ideal.” Kempton said that “The forces against Ammon Hennacy have far more than $5,000,000; they are all arms of all states from the traffic cop up to Georgei Malenkov. It is, he remembers, better to light a candle than curse the darkness… We have no more radical instrument in our society than the Catholic Worker group. Its members are pacifists, reconcilers, and anarchists, and they believe that the service of Christ involves secession from the state.” He ended by saying that upon my return from jail I “seemed altogether the least lonely man on earth.”</p>
                        <p>Patricia had shivered in the cold selling <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s on the corner where I had been pinched while I was in jail and on the next Friday we went up there again to disobey the law, “for a bad law is no better than any other bad thing.” The same cop was there and he told us to go ahead and sell <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s for all he cared, for he would not be the servant of the priest who had complained against me. Patricia and I went to the Church down the block and wanted to see the <abbr>Msgr.</abbr>, but he would not see us. We came back again in an hour and we heard his voice saying he would not see us, whereupon I asked his housekeeper for stationery upon which I wrote: Dear <abbr>Msgr.</abbr>: I would like to know if you or any one in authority complained about my selling the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> at the corner of 43 and Lexington. If you did, out of courtesy to the Church I will go across the street, and if you didn’t I’ll stay here for I have earned the right to do so.” I never heard from him afterwards. The appeal of the <abbr class="initialism">ACLU</abbr> to the next court was lost but the appeal to the higher court in Albany was won unanimously. I had the right to sell the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and my book as I was not engaged in a commercial venture. It was six months before this decision was reached.</p>
                        <p>On a Sunday morning I was selling <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s across the street from <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s Cathedral as usual when a cop came along and said that his brother was a priest and I had no right to sell my Communist paper here. I told him it was not a Communist paper and if it was that this was a free country and I had a right to sell it here, showing him a newspaper clipping of the court decision.</p>
                        <p>“I don’t care anything about the law. If I don’t want you here I’ll arrest you and you won’t be here. You will be in jail. And if the judge lets you out and you come back I’ll pinch you again; and if he lets you out and you come back I’ll pinch you again; I’ll wear you out.”</p>
                        <p>“What if I wear you out?” I asked.</p>
                        <p>He laughed and went away. If you are not ready to die you are not ready to live.</p>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>June 15, 1955—Air Raid Drills</h3>
                        <p>In the spring of 1955 I saw in the paper that there would be an air raid drill on June 15 and all were supposed to take part or suffer a penalty up to a year in jail and $500 fine, this being a state law. I told Dorothy and said we must get ready to disobey this foolish law. I contacted Ralph DiGia of the War Resisters League and he got in touch with others, <abbr class="initialism">F.O.R.</abbr>, American <abbr class="initialism">F.S.C.</abbr> … <abbr class="initialism">W.I.L.</abbr>, and so accordingly when the time came we had a whole group in City Hall Park ready to disobey when the whistles blew. The television men were there and asked Dorothy to tell why we were acting as we did, but she asked me to speak as my voice would be louder so I told them that if a bomb dropped there would be no police left to arrest us and that the whole thing was a farce. Robert Fisher, a young man uptown who was working as a social worker in lieu of going to the army, heard me on television and took a taxi and came down and went to jail with us. He is a Unitarian. Just before the whistles blew we gathered at the War Resisters Office at 5 Beekman Street where Bayard Rustin advised all of us not to refuse shelter unless we were ready to take the consequences of perhaps a year in jail and $500 fine. There were some who handed out leaflets until the last minute and then took shelter. Dorothy and I had signed a leaflet, which was well printed by Dave Dellinger, which we distributed. It began “In the name of Jesus who is God, who is Love, we will not obey this order to pretend, to evacuate, to hide… we will not be drilled into fear… We do not have faith in God if we depend upon the Atom Bomb” … ending up with our pacifist anarchist idea of refusal in every way to support war and governments.</p>
                        <p>We were ordered to take shelter and refused to do so. We were packed into vans and when we were waiting to be booked at Elizabeth Street station we noticed an elderly man with a badge on his cap whom we thought might be an attendant. I gave him one of our leaflets and it was not until later when our indictment was read in court that we discovered that he was Rocco Parelli, a bootblack, who had been sitting in the park knowing nothing about the air raid drill, who happened to be the first one arrested. Our indictment thus read: “Rocco Parelli and 28 others wilfully refused to take shelter.” It was entirely fitting that this common man, not a scholar, intellectual, or radical, should symbolically head the list, representative of the workers of the world we were trying to awaken. There were ten of us from the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>: Dorothy and I; Carol Perry, a tax refuser from San Francisco; Patricia Rusk; Mary Ann McCoy; Eileen Fantino; and Helen Russell of the group who work with Puerto Rico children in Harlem. Mary Roberts, an artist, Stanley Borowski who has helped in selling <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism caps">CW</abbr></i>s and picketing, and Michael Kovalak, who with others had picketed the Chancery office at the time of the graveyard strike in 1949. <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Muste, Ralph DiGia, and Bayard Rustin were old time War Resisters. Jackson MacLow, our atheist anarchist friend; Bob Berk, a young radical I had known in Tucson, and Dale Brotherington, a Quaker who had corresponded with me from Florida. Andy Osgood, a War Resister who had visited me in Phoenix, and Hugh Corbin of the same group who had picketed with us in Washington, <abbr class="postal eoc">D.C.</abbr> Also Edith Horwitz whose husband had been a <abbr class="initialism caps">CO</abbr>, and Jim Peck, an old time <abbr class="initialism caps">CO</abbr>. I had not met Henry Babcock, an elderly Quaker, or Henry Maiden, a Quaker with whom I celled. Kent Larrabee, head of the New York City Fellowship of Reconciliation. Orie Pell of the Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom, but the Queen of us all was Judith Beck, the actress who was supposed to be playing Phaedra in The Living Theatre that night but who went to jail with us. Dick Kern had promised us at the War Resister’s office not to “go limp” but to put on his show by himself elsewhere, but true to form he became enthusiastic and so the papers had a picture of him being carried by the police into the van. And Joan Hamilton had walked into the group and did not seem to be able to make up her mind whether she wanted to go through with it or not, as she was pregnant, and she was later released.</p>
                        <p>By chance we fellows had sandwiches but the women did not have anything to eat all day. Around 11 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> we appeared before Judge Louis Kaplan. As our names were read off, the Irish clerk it seemed did not wish to admit that an Irishman by the name of Hennacy could possibly be among these radicals so he persisted in pronouncing my name as “Hennacky.” Some of the girls laughed lightly at this and the judge pounded his gavel and wanted to know what was the matter. Judith answered pertly that she had had nothing to eat and was giddy. The judge asked her to step up and she did quickly, and not demurely. He told her to stand back and shouted angrily, asking her name, where she had been born, and who paid her rent. She answered without the customary “your honor” with which these dignitaries inflate their ego. This enraged him all the more and he wanted to know if she had ever been in a mental institution. <em>“No, have you?”</em> was her classic answer which will reverberate through these musty halls until the time when courts and prisons will cease to exist. The audience laughed and the judge shouted, “Take her for observation to Bellevue psychiatric ward.” Judith screamed dramatically and her husband who was one of the audience in the courtroom, a Yale graduate, stood up and shouted “You can’t do this.” The place was in an uproar. The judge ordered the courtroom cleared by the riot squad and we were all put back in our cells. Later he had us brought in and read off a written statement saying, <em>“Theoretically three million people have been killed in this air raid and you are the murderers.”</em> He placed our bail at the unheard of sum of $1,500 each.</p>
                        <p>At that time we of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> had not discussed the matter of bail so we accepted it after being held for 24 hours. I had thought to plead not guilty with the others to show our solidarity with them, but Dorothy being a better basic radical than I am persuaded me to plead guilty on the anarchist principle of “we did it once and we will do it again; and no legal quibbling.” So Dorothy and I, Carol, Mary, Stanley, Dick Kern, and Judith pled guilty, but Judge Bushel deferred our sentence until those pleading not guilty should have their trial.</p>
                        <p>After our arrest the diocesian paper, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">The Catholic News</i>, <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> City, felt that we were presumptuous in our “private interpretation” when the Church always upheld obedience to duly constituted authority. On the other hand the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Commonweal</i>, in a long editorial, praised our stand: “The saint and the radical (and they are often one and the same) share a common, ironic destiny, honored by posterity, they are usually persecuted during their life times… We honor the saint and the radical—dead; alive we find them too uncomfortable for our tribute… A society without its radical is a dead society, just as a Church without its saints is a blighted Church… we need them to remind us of uncomfortable truths, to rebuke our slothfulness and ease.” The <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Ave Maria</i> magazine, although not agreeing with our ideas, felt that we had the right to disobey the law. <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">The Nation</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Progressive</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Pittsburg Post Gazette</i>, and of course Murray Kempton in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper"><abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> Post</i> praised us. The <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Chicago Tribune</i> also praised our stand, and <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Harpers</i> magaine for October ended a long semi-editorial under “Personal” with this sentence: “Two of the group—Dorothy Day and Ammon Hennacy, of the Catholic Workers movement—have a long and honorable history of getting arrested for doing what ought to be done but no one else cares to do. In meekly running to cover, the rest of us have only compounded the dishonesty of a Civil Defense program that is neither serious nor safe.” However the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr>St.</abbr> Louis Catholic Register</i> devoted pages to prove from a legal and theological view that we should have obeyed the law. <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">The Boston Pilot</i>, oldest diocesion paper in the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr>, did not refer editorially to our case but had an editorial written in their August 13, 1955 issue headed “Need for Confession” by the editor Monseignor Lalley, our good friend, saying: “The greatest single act of human destruction in the history of the world must be placed on our doorstep—and we did it the second time at Nagasaki the next day as  to show that it was no accident… The supreme tragedy of this moment—a decade later—is that we still refuse to strike our breast and acknowledge our sin… American aid around the globe… We cannot buy back our innocence with all the gold in Fort Knox; guilt must be washed away in penitence… The nation would be appalled even today if an international tribunal should suggest that those who decided to drop the bomb should be called to some new Nuremberg to answer for it. But God is not mocked! We must wonder, however, how long He will wait for our repentance.”</p>
                        <p>Fritz Eichenberg, who had been in court, provided us with a sketch for the front page of the July–August <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. The case dragged on and on and finally on Dec. 22 we were all found guilty and sentence suspended. We had all expected to get time and when I came home Tom Caine had prepared a card wreathed in black on my desk, “To express our sincerest condolence on this sad occasion.” Opening it I saw in big letters: “So Sorry! <em>No Jail!</em>”</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>July 20, 1956</h3>
                        <p>This year, the night before the air raid drill Dorothy spoke with others at the Quaker Meeting House on East 20th Street and we distributed our leaflet headed “Ban the Bomb, by Personal Protest” and signed by Dorothy and me. This time we chose Washington Square and there were more reporters and television men than there were of us, and also the police. We gave our message to all of New York City. There was a fellow sitting near me whom I did not know and he happened to be the first put into the police van and I was the second. I asked him what kind of a radical he was: “I’m no radical; I am an instructor of Physics at Purdue University and I was visiting in town and reading a book and you folks surrounded me and now I am pinched with you.” Later in court he told this to the Judge saying that he knew by his study of the effect of explosions and bombs that if all the City of New York offered a visitor was to stand in a doorway to be safe, he knew it was foolish for he would have to be 500 feet underground to be safe. The figures were that 4,372,939 would have died in the City in our mythical warfare. So David Caplan was fined $25 and set free. Reporters who were present offered to pay his fine but he had the money and paid it himself. From the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> Dorothy and I, Stanley Borowski, and Deane Mowrer went to jail. Jim Peck and Ralph DiGia, who were arrested the first time, were with us again. They and Tom Rick, Al Uhrie of Ossining, and Marcus Cohen were of the War Resisters League, as was Patricia Daw, a young pregnant woman. Of the Quakers, Bob Gilmore, <abbr>Sec.</abbr> of the American Friends Service Committee in <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> City, George Willoughby of Philadelphia, <abbr>sec.</abbr> of the Central Committee for Conscientious Objectors, Dale Brotherington, who was with us last year, Mrs. Elizabeth Quigley of Agawam, <abbr class="postal">Mass.</abbr> and Dan O’Hagen of <abbr class="postal eoc">Pa.</abbr> Others were Nathaniel Cooper, a Zionist, Hollis Wyman, who had been in the air force at Hiroshima but was now a pacifist, and Michael Graine, a young atheistic anarchist friend of mine. Our case was postponed from time to time until October 31 when we appeared before Judge Kaplan who told us we were no different from other criminals and he would give us the works. He told us to come back on <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 15 and he would sentence us. Dorothy and I, Deane, Stanley, Dan O’Hagen, and Michael Graine pled guilty and the others stood trial.</p>
                        <p>We were all prepared to get six months, but the night before Little Tommy in the office showed me an item in a late paper that Judge Kaplan had been promoted to be a judge in the Court of Special Sessions at $3,500 a year increase in salary. We wondered if he would hold our case over or if we would get a worse judge. We were relieved when a kindly Irishman, Judge Comerford, appeared and listened patiently to us about our ideas—even a lengthy poem by Mike Graine. He gave us $25 fine or five days 1n jail although the <abbr class="initialism">D.A.</abbr> wanted to hold me on a charge of conspiracy. This judge was sympathetic to the <abbr class="initialism">I.R.A.</abbr> in the old days, we heard, and was marshall of the <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s Day Parade. We all did the five days and many people picketed the Women’s House of Detention where the women were jailed. I took half a dozen books with me, thinking I would have plenty of time to read them, but I was not allowed to take them inside with me. As we were being processed a guard at Hart’s Island asked me, “Where’s Dorothy?” I said she was in the woman’s jail. “Where’s Hennacy?” he asked. I told him who I was and he said he had read the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> for years. One of my fellow prisoners was arrested for sleeping down by the river; he had on an overcoat but no shirt. Another was arrested for panhandling and had $43 on him when arrested. His defense was that he “didn’t ever want to be broke.” We each had a separate cell with a mattress but the radio blasted until 9:30 <abbr class="time eoc">p.m.</abbr> Later Mike and Stanley went to Dorm 4 and Dan and I went to Dorm 16. There were about 80 prisoners in a dorm, two-thirds of them Negroes and very few grey headed men. The light went out at 9:30 and we were up at 5:30. For the first time in two years I had a good rest. We were not hurried at meals as we had been on Rikers Island and the guards were not so ill tempered and profane.</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>July 12, 1957</h3>
                        <p>This time the protest was practically a <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> one and it was made in the small park opposite the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> on Chrystie Street. Television and newspaper men gave us good coverage. Those arrested were Dorothy and I, Deane, Kerran Dugan who at that time lived with us and was an Associate Editor, and young Karl Meyer, a convert whom I had met at <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter Claver House in Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr> several years before. Michael Graine and Dan O’Hagen again, and Judith and her husband Julian Beck. Sandy Darlington came from Seattle to take part with us. He did not know exactly what he believed but he wished to be counted with us. Later at Times Square a young Methodist couple, Richard and Joan Moses, had parked their car and all alone disobeyed the air raid warning. We met them in jail later. The judge this time was a tough Catholic by the name of Walter Bayer. He told us to read the Bible and said that we were a “heartless bunch of individuals who breathe contempt” of the law. He did not give us a chance to explain that most of us were anarchists who took no part in making laws so we did not consider any judge as our servant to enforce them. He gave us 30 days.</p>
                        <p>“Unfit. Commitment <abbr>No.</abbr> 483325. Ammon Hennacy, Hart Istand, Department of Correction. 30 days. Admitted July 13, 1957.” So read my yellow card.</p>
                        <p>It was not until then that I remembered that it was July 13, 1917, just 40 years before, that I had entered Atlanta Prison in World War <span class="z3998:roman">I</span>. I was called “unfit” for labor because I was over 60 and was put with the old men in Dorm 12. I helped as houseman a little and spent the rest of my time pulling weeds from my favorite vegetables (egg plant and peppers) in a small garden nearby. The Warden called me in and wanted me to rewrite something he had composed about traffic safety. I made it alive in a few minutes. Just then the prison doctor came in and the warden addressing me said that he had a plan to lower taxes which was to make bingo legal, something like the pari mutual in horse racing. He asked what I thought about it and I told him it was crazy as hell for the charge which a third of the people came to prison for was gambling—the numbers racket—and it did not need to be sanctified by the state, as it had already been by the Church. He said he had a job for me in the Commissary department. I worked there for the rest of my time, getting $2 worth of goods a week for my work which was doing a little cleaning and checking of stock. Karl was under 20 and was sent to Rikers Island. Julian, Mike, Kerran, Bob, Sandy, and I met in the yard at times, as we worked in different places, and sat in the sun with our shirts off, as did other prisoners. The glum guard imprisoned on the other side of the 12 foot fence had an unhappy time marching back and forth “guarding” us and took out his discomfort by telling us to put our shirts back on. The bread here was white but fairly good. Two thirds of the inmates were Negroes and were in mostly for selling dope. The fellow in the next bed to me had started at Elmira as a juvenile, had been transferred to Dannemora, and had been out only two years since then. I met <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Higgins, the Chaplain, and in his dealings with prisoners he appreciated my quote from John Dewey: <em>“A good man is one who, no matter how bad he has been, is getting better; and a bad man is one, who, no matter how good he has been, is getting worse.”</em> I had met him at Fordham before as he teaches there.</p>
                        <p>Meanwhile there was continual picketing of the women’s jail where Dorothy, Deane, Judith, and Joan were incarcerated. We picketed 24 hours a day. From 10 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> until 6 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr>. Young women with their babies in carriages, and scores of students enlivened the atmosphere. We sang radical songs and had a good time. The cops and the matrons at the jail were generally friendly after they got used to us. The <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Commonweal</i> said that few Catholics protested when Dorothy was in jail because she protested against the destruction of mankind. “Those who protest against risque movies are given Catholic Action medals.” And the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Boston Pilot</i> said, “The conscience of Dorothy Day is clear — can we say the same of our own?”</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>May 6, 1958</h3>
                        <p>We had been picketing the Atomic Energy Commission at 70 Columbus <abbr>Ave.</abbr> for several years, and there was a week of picketing going on when we heard that the air raid drill would be on May 6th. Bob Gilmore was told by the Quakers that he should not take the chance of getting three or more months in jail by disobeying the law with us, but he and I said that to cease our picketing for ten minutes because of an order by another arm of the war-making state would be indefensible on our part. So both Bob and Stewart Meecham of the Quakers joined Dorothy and me and Deane, Kerran, and Karl Meyer. Al Uhrie came along for the second time, and Art Harvey, a vegetarian anarchist whom I had known in Detroit and at Cape Canaveral, disobeyed also. We made clear radical statements in court and were surprised when Judge Kenneth Phipps, a Negro, gave us 30 days and suspended the sentence.</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>April 17, 1959</h3>
                        <p>The night before the air raid drill some Socialists led by Dave McReynolds in the Village met with us and said they would also disobey the air raid drill, and Dave had an article in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Village Voice</i> saying he would be with us. We issued a leaflet stating our position which was distributed in City Hall Park. Besides Dorothy and I and Deane and Karl and Arthur Harvey, fourteen others disobeyed and we were all arrested. We five refused bail and the others were releasd on bail which I suppose I upped to $1,000 for when he asked me if I did not believe in law and order I said “no” and was cut off before I could explain that I believed in God’s law. The others were Dave McReynolds, Al Scott, a former <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>, Scott Herrick, <abbr class="initialism">FOR</abbr> member and real estate man, Sheldon Weeks, Quaker, Thomas Grabell, Martin Smolin, Joe Caldwell, a Catholic, Gil Turner, Joe Fraser, Walter Crutchfield, Bob Schoenhold, Joe Schulman, Milton Chee, and Bob Peck. Deane … Dorothy knew, but not the rest of us until we met in jail, that brave Janice Smith had come with her two children to the park and had been arrested also, but they released her. She reads the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and says that her husband bought it from me at 14th and Broadway. After four days we five were released on our own name and had a day of freedom before we all appeared before kindly looking Judge Roe. Dorothy was at one end of the line, I was in the middle, and the judge commenced at the other end asking each one how many times he had been arrested on this charge and why he disobeyed the law. Attorney Glass spoke for the others saying that if the object of the law was to deter Dorothy it had not done so and would not do so, that he was not empowered to Speak for her but had, as a man, to express his thought. Dave McReynolds spoke clearly about Germans being asked to disobey Hitler and be true to their consciences so we also should be free to obey our consciences. Gil Turner, a folk singer, gave logical reasons for his action. I said that I followed <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter as a Catholic and Thoreau as an anarchist, that I had no personal animosity toward judges, police, tax men, and civil defense men, but that they were all in a bad business. The judge asked me about rendering unto Caesar and I told him Caesar was getting too much around here and some one had to stand up for God. The <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Village Voice</i> for 4-29-60 in a front page headline said “Too Much to Caesar, Too Little to God. A judge and an anarchist traded Biblical quotations last Friday morning.” We five got ten days in jail or $25 fine, and the others had sentence suspended as this was their first offense. I was in the Tombs on Sunday and went to Confession. The young Chaplain said “Hennacy, what about obeying the civil authorities?” I didn’t know he knew my name but replied that the way I understood it we were supposed to obey God rather than man. He replied that the Catholic Church was not in favor of pacifism and the breaking of laws, but after a time he gave me absolution. Just before Mass he stood before us saying “This is the second Sunday after Easter. In the Epistle today it says to obey the civil authorities.” It said a lot of other things but it seems he had to get off his commercial. The sermon was no worse or better than the average on the outside. Two guards at Hart Island wanted our literature, remembering me from the other times and also on television they said, when I was on <i epub:type="se:name">Nightbeat</i>. My number this time was 516337. I had a good rest and read historical novels, as there was not much work to do. I met several prisoners who were in for “jostling” which is an ineffectual attempt to pick pockets in a crowd.</p>
                        <p>There was mass picketing of the women’s jail in the Village. <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Commonweal</i> drew an analogy between Dorothy whose conscience opposed atom bombs now, and Major Eatherly, a Catholic, who had dropped the bomb at Hiroshima. For years he has been in and out of mental institutions as his guilt
has deranged him. The <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper"><abbr class="initialism">N.Y.</abbr> Post</i> said editorially: “We feel a certain kinship with those behind the bars. For the notion that modern man can snugly protect himself against the hydrogen bomb by conducting such fire drills is a form of self delusion almost indistinguishable from madness.”</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>May 3, 1960</h3>
                        <p>I came home by plane from Spokane in the midst of a speaking tour in the west to be here for the air raid refusal. I had thought if we would have 50 it would be a great victory. When then sirens blew, there were 500 in the City Hall Park and another 500 on the sidewalks who laughed when ordered by the police to take shelter. Janice Smith had collected about 80 women with their children and there were hundreds of students playing hookey from school. Kay Boyle, the author, was right behind me singing “Civil Defense Is No Defense; We Shall Not Be Moved.” Norman Mailer and Dwight MacDonald were there also but the police were frustrated when they called upon us to move and no one moved. They wanted to know if we were not Americans and most people laughed. They arrested a few here and there, 25 in all, being careful not to get any leaders it seemed. Later in court I asked Officer O’Hearn who arrests us every year why he had not arrested Dorothy and me. “Why didn’t you ask me?” he said, but we were in plain sight with our signs. I told him that next year there would be a thousand of us and he had better get more police. When the sirens had stopped blowing Dave McReynolds got up on a bench and shouted “This law is dead,” and we all cheered. Television men asked me to lead a song celebrating our Victory so I sang <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">John Brown’s Body</i> and said that we would all be back to break the law next year. Zita Ferron, Diana Lewis, and Thomas Franz, a student, were Catholics among the 26 arrested. Judge Calazzo gave a patriotic lecture and sentenced them to five days in jail. I picketed the Tombs that night for 14 hours and Bob Steed picketed the women’s the next night. On Sunday there was mass picketing at the women’s jail, and I picketed for two nights.</p>
                        <p>The <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Village Voice</i> had pictures of the demonstration and the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Nation</i>, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Commonweal</i> had editorials favoring us. The <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper"><abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> World Telegram</i> had an editorial entitled “Exercise in Futility,” saying “Yesterday’s test can be called meaningful and successful only if a potential enemy’s plan is to drop marshmallow puffs on <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> City—and to advertise in advance what time they are coming.” Murray Kempton in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper"><abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> Post</i> had a typical article on “Laughter in the Park” which put the Civil Defense authorities in their proper place. On a Saturday night we had a party for the jailbirds and friends in Debs Hall where <abbr class="name">A.J.</abbr> Muste and Paul Goodman spoke and Muste gave diplomas to the jail graduates. And later at the Community Church James Weschler, editor of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper"><abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> Post</i>, Kay Boyle, Norman Thomas, and others spoke. Bob Steed and I picketed Brooklyn College in the rain supporting the hundreds of students who refused to take part in the drill there. 59 were suspended for four days, but as in our case, the leaders were not touched. Finally the college authorities gave in and rescinded some of the heat; a Fellowship of Reconciliation Dean being the one who suspended them. It was his job I suppose but he put his job above his pacifist ideals.</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>Air Raid Drill Picketing</h3>
                        <p>On October 3, 1960 Mary Lathrop, Jack Baker, and I from the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, and Ralph DiGia and others from the War Resisters, and others from peace groups commenced to picket the Civil Defense Office at 46th and Lexington. We had told them in advance of our plans. We picketed five days a week from noon until 2 <abbr class="time eoc">p.m.</abbr> My sign read:</p>
                        <blockquote>
                        <h4>Civil Disobedience</h4>
                        <h5>We Call for 5,000<br />To Refuse to take part<br />In the compulsory<br />Air Raid Drill at<br />City Hall Park in 1961<br />Ammon Hennacy, Catholic Worker, 39 Spring <abbr class="eoc">St.</abbr></h5>
                        </blockquote>
                        <p>At times twenty people would picket with us and at times there were only the three of us. The employees at the Civil Defense were friendly. Linus Pauling stopped and greeted us kindly. I did not know him but Mary had heard him speak and introduced me to him. One fellow came with an umbrella and signs said that this was the perfect shelter. The police did not bother us. Many stopped to take our pictures. As usual students came and picketed for a few hours with us. Jim Peck came often and walked along with his premeditated stride. After 2 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> we went to a restaurant nearby and had coffee and warmed up. Carrying our signs there and to and fro in the subway we were often praised by people who saw us nearly every day. The Canadian Broadcasting Company asked me questions and while they played only a small part of the conversation they sent me a check for $100 for my trouble.</p>
                        <p>Once when there was a heavy snow we shoveled a walk for us to picket in. The lazy attendants at the Civil Defense did not clear the sidewalk, although all along the street the snow had been removed. Finally we shoveled the entire walk for them. If they are so worried about clearing people from the streets in an air raid and cannot even get the energy to clean their own sidewalk it is time they folded up. We continued our picketing until <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 1, when Mary went south with Dorothy on a speaking tour, and I went north and west. Jack picketed intermittingly during the spring.</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>April 28, 1961</h3>
                        <p>I had come home from Salt Lake City to be in time for the air raid refusal and held a sign saying that for the seventh time I had openly refused to take part in the air raid drill. I saw <abbr>Col.</abbr> O’Hearn and he saw my sign, but as the year before Dorothy and I were not arrested. A powerful leaflet was distributed, headed “Brave Men Do Not Hide.” There were about 2,000 people refusing this time. I was asked to say something, and others spoke. About 40 were arrested and got varying sentences. I picketed for the women at their jail, and all night for the men in the Tombs, leaving in a few days to start the Joe Hill House in Salt Lake City.</p>
                        <p>After the demonstration Murray Kempton asked me to autograph my sign for his teenage college daughter whom I had not met when I visited him in Princeton several years ago.</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>Victory</h3>
                        <p>In 1962 the farce of the air raid was so obvious that there was no compulsory drill.</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>Tax Picketing</h3>
                        <p>After the Old Pioneer had died in 1952 I stayed on at the farm at the request of his son until the estate had been settled. Meanwhile I had written a Declaration of Conscience giving my history, which was printed in the July–August 1953 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. In it I quoted Thoreau: “How does it become a man to behave toward this American government today? I answer, that he cannot without disgrace be associated with it. If 1,000, if 100, if 10 men whom I could name—if ten honest men only, if one honest man, in this state of Massachusetts, ceasing to hold slaves, were actually to withdraw from this co-partnership, and be locked up in the county jail therefore, it would be the abolition of slavery in America.”</p>
                        <p>During my first day of picketing a woman told me that she had a letter from her son in Korea, and that her three other boys would go to jail before they would go to war. “God bless you,” she said. Now for the first time in my fasting I was a Catholic and I went to Mass and Communion each morning. I always notify the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr>, the tax men, the police, <abbr>etc.</abbr> of my picketing ahead of time, and this year I sent a typed letter to the 165 clergy in Phoenix asking them to pray for the success of my picketing if they could in conscience do so. I started the fast weighing 142 pounds. The scales which told fortunes on slips of paper came out with the dubious advice that read: “Don’t always follow the line of least resistance.”</p>
                        <p>Near quitting time on the next to last day a young fellow whose appearance marked him as of the nervous intellectual type, and not that of a rowdy, stopped and asked me if this was my sign that I was carrying. I told him that it was. He said that I had better call the police for he was going to take the sign and tear it up and dance on it, for no Communist could carry such a sign in his town. I told him that I was no Communist; that I was a Catholic and an anarchist. He replied that he was a Catholic. I asked him what parish he belonged to and it was <abbr>St.</abbr> Matthew’s, the same as mine. I inquired if he had been at Mass the last Sunday and if he had noticed me selling <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s in front of the church. He had been to last Mass and had not noticed me. I told him that if he had looked closer he would have noticed a candle burning before the Blessed Mother for the success of my intention in this picketing and fasting. He didn’t believe it. I asked his name and he told me but would not give me his address. I said that I did not believe in the police and if he got any pleasure out of tearing up my signs he could do so. He took them and tore them off the standard and danced on them there on the sidewalk. He refused to take a copy of my leaflet or the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, muttering “Communist, Communist.” I advised him to see our parish priest and get straight on the matter of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and he promised to do so. I then called the priest and told him what had happened. He did not remember the name of my patriotic friend.</p>
                        <p>I wanted to see the <abbr class="initialism">AP</abbr> man on another matter so I went to the newspaper office. Here I saw my friend with the signs telling a reporter about the Communist he had found. I recognized the reporter from pictures I had seen of him although I had never met him. The reporter said that I was not a Communist for they all knew of my picketing activities for years. The patriotic Catholic said that he was a veteran from Korea and repeated that no one could carry such a sign in his town. The reporter said that he was a veteran of two wars and he had fought for just such things as freedom for Hennacy to carry signs and picket; that if the young man did not like my signs he could do as the pickets in front of the Whitehouse in the Rosenberg case did: get other signs and picket the pickets. The reporter also said that I was standing up for the freedom which was true Americanism, and although he disagreed with my ideas, that the patriotic young man was acting like a Fascist or a Communist in denying me freedom. The young man said he would come down the next day and take any other signs I would have. The reporter told him he was lucky he was opposing such a person as Hennacy when he broke the law for I would not take him to court. The <abbr class="initialism">AP</abbr> carried the story of my torn signs and some reporters wanted me to prefer charges so as to make the story more exciting, but I explained my anarchist ideas which did not allow retaliation. No one bothered me the next day. Ginny and her boys came up at 3:30 and broke my fast with me and I left for New York on the 4 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> bus, stopping at Platt Cline’s in Flagstaff and to see the Van Dressers in Santa Fe. Here the local paper, which goes to the atomic workers in nearby Los Alamos, printed the next day a factual account of my opposition in paying taxes for their bomb.</p>
                        <p>My first picketing in New York City was at the Custom House down near South Ferry where the wind blew the signs mightily at times. The <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> printed a special leaflet about Hiroshima Day, <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 6, also being Transfiguration Day. John Stanley, Stanley Borowski, and Roger O’Neil helped me picket and Dorothy came around at noon for a couple of hours. Catholics said they had phoned to the Chancery office and that they were going to stop me. A cop said I was not allowed to picket and I told him I would call the Civil Liberties Union as to my exact rights and would be back in half an hour. I called and they said to go ahead. The cop never came back and a few days later he walked by and smiled. A cop argued with me about paying taxes and conferred with the tax man inside and I was not bothered. Several men stopped and said they would report me to the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr>. On the last half hour of our picketing some Catholic teenagers had Dorothy and me backed up against a car calling us Communists. Just then the lady who had called the Chancery office and found that they were “not for us and not against us” stopped in wonder, for she had not seen Dorothy picketing before. We were very tired from buffeting the wind and wear and tear of answering questions and we left inviting the youngsters to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. Now eight years later a boy is working in our office for the summer who spoke to me that day and got a leaflet and a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>. His father is a detective but he and his brother are Catholic conscientious objectors.</p>
                        <p>In August of 1955 Carol Perry, who had quit her job with the telephone company in San Francisco and had done housework in order that no withholding tax would be taken from her pay, signed a statement with me and we picketed the tax office, Dorothy coming along at times also. One of my signs read “The individual conscience Versus the atom-bomb? Yes, there is no other way.” (<i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Life</i> magazine editorial Aug. 20, 1954) Bob Steed had just come up from Memphis and he helped me picket, as did others, among them Judith Beck who had a dainty sign reading, “Love and Life, not Death and Taxes.” A passer-by demanded that the cop on duty “Arrest that man!” The cop did not know if he had the right to arrest me so he went to headquarters to find out and came back smiling, telling me to go ahead and picket. The employees in the building greeted me more kindly and there was no red ink spattered on us from the windows above as had happened last time. We gave out as many as a thousand <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s in a day.</p>
                        <p>About an hour before we had intended to go home on the last day a nervous ex-marine walking along with his girlfriend worked himself up into excitement and a small crowd finally collected around Jackson MacLow, Bob, and Dorothy. Carol and I were handing out papers at the other end of the street just then and we had gone to make a phone call. As we returned my heart jumped to notice a larger crowd and much loud talk, expecting to see Jackson, Bob, and Dorothy in their midst, but happily they were picketing from the far end of the block up to the crowd. Later I heard what had happened. A sort of well-dressed man said that all this picketing was a disgrace to his Church and wanted the crowd to beat up the Commies who pretended to be Catholics. He wanted Bob’s name and called a cop who took Bob’s name and address and went away. Dorothy had the good sense to refuse to argue with such excited people, so she and Jackson and Bob left the crowd to argue among themselves and went on picketing. Then an important and portly well-dressed man came up and dispersed the crowd saying that he had heard Dorothy speak years ago and that the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> was a fine group of people, and that he was not going to allow any harm to come to these good Catholics. He showed the crowd his Knights of Columbus membership card and in a few minutes the sidewalk was clear. Coming over he addressed me by name and I recognized that I had sold him a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> at Pine and Nassau. We continued to picket for an hour with no more bother from anyone.</p>
                        <p>August 1956 I was picketing again at the Custom House and this was the first time since 1949 that I did not have the police or mobs bothering me. The Friday before my fast a new Irish tax man had come to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> office to collect my taxes. He called me in his office on the seventh floor on the first day I picketed asking about my “hidden assets.” After a time he seemed persuaded that he was not going to get any money from me and said he would pass my case up to his Superiors. Later a tax man from last year met me on the picket line and in a friendly manner inquired about my fasting. Last year two <abbr class="initialism">T</abbr>-men came from Washington and questioned Dorothy, Carol, and me several times at the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> and at 90 Church Street, saying that they would report their findings to Washlngton and would see what was to be done about our open refusal to pay income taxes. Each day Bob Steed helped me picket. A Catholic whose folks knew Sacco in an anarchist club in the old days came during his noon hour and helped hand out papers. One man seriously thought that I was advertising a service whereby people could learn how to get out of paying taxes. While resting for five minutes in the park each hour I noticed great shoots of Johnson grass disfiguring the scenery as they appeared between the neat evergreen border. Ordinarily I would exercise my anarchist prerogative and uproot them but I was too tired to lift a hand. On the last day as I was again resting, along comes the park attendant and asked the occupants of each bench to move in order that he might sweep a few dead leaves from behind the benches. Then he proceeded to sweep this refuse along the hedge, pushing it along with his broom indifferently so that some remained along the hedge to blow around again. It was not his job to beautify the park by getting rid of the unsightly Johnson grass. It was nobody’s job it seemed, so my last act in the park was to pull it up.</p>
                        <p>In 1957 the tax office had moved to Varick and West Houston Streets, which was nearer home, and as it happened this side of the building was almost entirely in the shade. Here I picketed from the 6th to the 17th. Frances Rogosz from Minersville, <abbr class="postal">Pa.</abbr> helped me during the rush hour at noon and Bob Steed and Janet Burwash helped at times. As I had just come back from my strenuous Las Vegas picketing in the heat I was persuaded to drink buttermilk and orange juice at times during this fast. I had many expressions of sympathy from passersby and hardly any criticism.</p>
                        <p>In 1958 Zita Fearon of <abbr>St.</abbr> Cloud, a small blonde, helped me picket often, and Bob, Deane, Anne Marie Stokes, and others cheered me from time to time. The Peacemakers had invited me to address their conference but I could not do so as I was picketing, so they came for a day and visited and helped me picket: Ralph Templin, who had known Gandhi in India, Bob Luitweiler, who had been with me at Cape Canaveral, and Ernie Bromley, active on many pacifist fronts. During all these years many of us had picketed uptown near the Japanese Embassy telling them that we were sorry our government had been guilty at Hiroshima and Nagasaki.</p>
                        <p>In 1959 my tax statement quoted William Lloyd Garrison, the first Christian anarchist in this country, that he would not equivocate and he would not be silent and he would be heard. One of my signs read “It is a high crime to break the laws of Jesus Christ in order to yield obedience to earthly rulers. Pope Leo <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>. ”Jack Baker, pretty Ellen Hollinde in her bare feet, and Hugh Madden, “my shadow,” helped me picket. Hugh has whiskers like Uncle Sam, and is an ex-farmer, ex-Trappist novice, with a scratchy twisted rope around his neck. He fasted also and knelt at prayer every so often. A huge bale of paper fell from a truck in the middle of the street and no one paid any attention to it. Finally I left my picketing and edged it over to the curb. No trouble from anyone this year.</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>Picketing Tax Oflice, <abbr class="initialism">N.Y.</abbr> City, 1960</h3>
                        <p>I commenced this picketing <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 6th as usual at the branch tax office at Varick and <abbr class="compass">W.</abbr> Houston Streets, but after a week found that the main office was at 484 Lexington Avenue, at 46th Street, so I picketed there for a week also. Tax men would come out of the office and greet me kindly, take a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and argue with their fellow workers about how I got by with it. I was on <abbr class="initialism">NBC</abbr> for a few minutes with a factual interpretation of my ideas. Mary Lathrop helped me picket daily and other friends came around at times, among them Diana Lewis who had been in jail on the air raid refusal.</p>
                        <p>One day a small, jerky young man bumped into me as I was picketing. Each of us said “excuse me” to the other. As I turned around and came back he danced in front of me like a gorilla, saying, “You might get in trouble carrying that sign.”</p>
                        <p>“Oh, I’m always fixed for trouble,” I said confidently, as if I had a dozen guardian angels at my side.</p>
                        <p>“You like the Japs?” he asked, seeing my Hiroshima sign.</p>
                        <p>“Sure I like the Japs. I like everybody. I like myself. I like you. I am a peaceful man.”</p>
                        <p>“I bumped into you on purpose; I wanted to see if you would fight. You are a peaceful man; I am too,” and he walked away.</p>
                        <p>A reporter from Phoenix who knew me but whom I had never met was visiting in <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> City and was happy to write me up for his paper. The Belgian priest who had been in house arrest by the Communists in China for six years, who had spoken at the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, and who felt that the enemy of the Chinese people was not the Communists but Chaing in Formosa, stopped and blessed me as I picketed. The uptown cops came around and asked questions but no one bothered me.</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>Atom Bomb and Missile Picketing</h3>
                        <p>I belonged to a committee of pacifists who had planned to enter the atomic test grounds and if necessary be atomized as a protest against the biggest bomb which would be dropped in August of 1957. As I had been picketing the tax office during that time for many years I did not want to leave this front for another front, so I wrote to the authorities in Las Vegas, to the Bishop in Reno, and priests in Las Vegas that from June 17 through the 28th I would fast and picket the Atomic Energy Commission to waken up pacifists, as it was 12 years since we dropped the bomb at Hiroshima. In New York City when we had picketed the Atomic Energy Commission I had become acquainted with the Publicity Director, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Grace Urros. When she learned that I was going to picket in Las Vegas she said that she would write and tell them to be nice to me, and she was coming out there a few days later and would see me. When I began to picket <abbr>Lt.</abbr> <abbr>Col.</abbr> Hunter greeted me kindly and said he would do anything to help me except to cease dropping bombs. And he had Don the guard bring out a chair each morning in order that I might rest in the shade at times. And also I was invited in the air conditioned office to cool off and for a drink of spring water. All of the folks there were cordial except two Irish Catholics; the Spanish Catholics being especially friendly.</p>
                        <p>I did not know until I came back to <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> City that on the day before I started picketing the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Las Vegas Review Journal</i> had an article, “Bishop Dwyer in Warning Against <abbr class="initialism">A</abbr>-Test Attitude. Bishop Dwyer referred to the recent appeal of His Holiness, Pope Pius <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>, for a cessation of tests of atomic weapons. He explained, however, that the appeal was directed to the whole world, and not limited to the Nevada proving grounds… Regarding the proposed plan of Ammon Hennacy, staff member of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Catholic Worker</i>, to picket the Las Vegas <abbr class="initialism">AEC</abbr> office, Bishop Dwyer said in a private interview, ‘this man does not have episcopal approval for his effort.’ Questioned about the status of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">Catholic Worker</i> as representing the mind of the Church in organized labor, Bishop Dwyer explained that it has no official status. Again, in a democracy, he said, ‘we subscribed to principles of free speech and a free press, and certain forms of extreme liberalism can under certain circumstances be as dangerous as some of the other “isms” circulated throughout the world today.’ Bishop Dwyer re-aflirmed that basically the Church is concerned with the eternal salvation of the souls of men. At the same time Catholics in every part of the world are bound in conscience to respect and support lawful authority of civil governments.”</p>
                        <p>In a book just published by the <abbr class="initialism">AEC</abbr> they say that the winds carry this atomic dust eastward in an east and west, but not much of a north and south direction, taking from four to seven weeks to encircle the globe. “About 10% of the debris stored in the stratosphere descends to the earth annually. Strontium-90 produces anemia, bone necrosis, cancer, and possibly Leukemia… Most of the strontium-90 in the present world-wide fallout, however, is in a water-soluable form… there is evidence that in the local fallout the strontium-90 constitutes a smaller percentage of the total fission products than it does farther away… the lymphoid tissue—tonsils, adenoids, spleen, and certain areas of the intestinal lining—is one of the most radio-sensitive of all tissues… In Japan… there was an increased incidence of miscarriages and premature births, and a greater death rate mong expectant mothers.”</p>
                        <p>Here it was from 100 to 120 degress and I faced the sunny side of the building all day. I was able to get a reasonable hotel a block away. My signs quoted the Popes against atomic war and for the arousing of the Christian conscience. I went to Mass downtown at the <abbr>St.</abbr> Joan of Arc Church and the <abbr>Msgr.</abbr> was cordial when I told him of my plans. The next day I went another mile and a half the other side of town to <abbr>St.</abbr> Anne’s where the priest was much opposed to my ideas, but as I went there every day he soon became friendly. The first day Don Ashworth of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Review Journal</i> and a photographer interviewed me, and that night a good front page picture and article told of my ideas and mission in Las Vegas. Reporters from Hearst, <abbr class="initialism">AP</abbr>, <abbr class="initialism">UP</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper"><abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> Times</i>, the Japanese press and television from Albuquerque also took pictures of <abbr>Col.</abbr> Hunter and me. The correspondent of the <abbr class="initialism">ABC</abbr> papers from Barcelona with headquarters in Washington, <abbr class="initialism">D.C.</abr> was happy to see a radical anarchist.</p>
                        <p>I knew that the Irish Catholic Chief of Police had once studied to be a priest; when he stopped on the second day and asked me if I had ever been convicted of a felony I told him that I had. He asked me if I had registered myself at police headquarters as an ex-convict. I told him that I did not believe in obeying such laws and he replied that I could get 30 days for it. He already understood that he could not imprison me for something that had happened so long ago, and besides Roosevelt had given all <abbr class="initialism">CO</abbr>s a pardon in 1933. He really wanted to discuss pacifism and anarchism with me and we visited cordially for a time. That night I was on television (Stetson hats; I told them I would not appear with any cigarette or fake medicine ads). My sign and book were shown and I gave my message. The folks at the <abbr class="initialism">AEC</abbr> said it was good. Later I discovered that the head of the television company had phoned a priest to find out if the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> was on the subversive list and was told that we were very radical but were good Catholics. The priest they phoned was my friend at <abbr>St.</abbr> Anne’s.</p>
                        <p>In the morning at daylight I got up to watch the atomic test 75 miles to the west. First a flash like lightning, then the thunder, then the mushroom cloud rising and remaining stationary in the air until it would be blown toward Salt Lake City and points east. On another morning I waited to see another bomb go off and nothing happened. It seems that fifteen minutes before the button was to be pushed that the wind turned toward Las Vegas. They abandoned the experiment for that day for they were not going to have the poison hitting their city; it could go elsewhere.</p>
                        <p>One Jehovah’s Witness tried to tell me that it was wrong to oppose the bombs for they were being built up for Armegeddon. No one called me Commie during the whole 12 days. On the next to last day of my picketing I got up early to see the test where a bomb twice as big as any was to be dropped. 2,000 Marines were waiting on tiptoe to enter the fatal area and many animals were half dressed with clothing to see the effect on their bodies of the radiation. We all waited and waited and the explosion did not occur. About 10 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> <abbr>Col.</abbr> Hunter came back from the field saying “Hennacy, you stopped this one, you had better get back to <abbr class="initialism">N.Y.</abbr> and let us get to work.” They had pressed the button and the bomb didn’t go off. My son-in-law later showed me the Pasadena Sunday paper with the headline “Atomic Test Foe Scores ‘Victory’” saying that I had an accidental moral victory inasmuch as this bomb was a dud. After I left, the <abbr class="initialism">AEC</abbr> folks sent me an article by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ashworth in the Review journal headed “<abbr class="initialism">AEC</abbr> Picket Gives Up 22 Pounds to the Cause.” I drank sauerkraut juice to break my fast, wanting something sour, and next day my daughter Sharon in Pasadena had an avacado salad for me.</p>
                        <p>I had planned this Las Vegas picketing in time to get home for the air raid drill in which this time, as told before, I got 30 days, and I got out of jail in time to begin my tax picketing. During this time a group led by Larry Scott went to the actual atom grounds prepared “to be atomized for Christ and humanity.” They had dressed prepared to sleep out in the area and to offer civil disobedience to the death and several of them “went over the fence” and were arrested. A pacifist lawyer made the agreement with the authorities that if they went home and didn’t go over the fence again as planned, there would be no charge; if they went over the fence again they would get 60 days. They prayed and held a vigil all night and God told them to go home. This is terrible: to go to thousands of dollars worth of expense and then to chicken out is a poor way of advancing a cause.</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>Picketing Missiles in Florida</h3>
                        <p>Half a dozen Peacemakers met by plan at Cocoa Beach, <abbr class="postal">Fla.</abbr> on Saturday April 12, 1958 to protest the missiles at Cape Canaveral. Most of us had other plans, Art Harvey and I to refuse to take part in the air raid drill May 6 in <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> City, so we did not plan to offer any civil disobedience in Florida. That night we spent at the home of a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> reader by the name of <abbr class="name">C.D.</abbr> Preston in Orlando, who is the head of Christian Science pacifists, this being the only church that does not allow its members to be conscientious objectors. Here we made our signs and each of us chose a church where we would distribute leaflets in the morning. I also carried a sign which I wanted to use later and put it by the fence near the Catholic Church in the suburb of Rockledge. I had phoned the priest twice to say that I would distribute the leaflets but his housekeeper did not get the message to him.</p>
                        <p>“Take the word Catholic off that sign and leaflet. You don’t have permission from the Bishop or from me to use it. You give Catholics a bad name,” said Father LeMay at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s Church in Rockledge.</p>
                        <p>“We are laymen and we do not need permission from the Bishop or from you to oppose missiles for murder,” I answered, and continued: “The Church has had a bad name long enough in supporting wars. I like the name Catholic and I am trying to make it mean something like the early Christians meant it to be when Christians couldn’t go to court or kill in war. I venture that in the years to come the Church will be proud that we Catholic Workers opposed missiles and war and that we gave the church a good name.”</p>
                        <p>My sign read “We Protest Missiles for Murder, Catholic Worker, New York City. Peacemakers” and “Missiles Attack; They Don’t Defend.” The priest said that he had heard of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> and that we could picket any place we liked but not to use the name Catholic. We discussed the whole matter of pacifism for about ten minutes. I said I had as much right to us the name Catholic for peace as Catholic war veterans had to use it for war. The priest was not angry but we could not agree that I couldn’t use the name Catholic in
pacifist literature. As I was talking to Father LeMay the ushers had torn up my sign and broken the stick in pieces. (Before we left Marge Swann took a snapshot of me standing by the Church with this broken sign in the shape of a cross.) As it was an hour until the next Mass I took a walk around town looking for a store where I could buy a paper. I saw a Presbyterian Church and gave the minister copies of our leaflet. Just then I saw my four Catholic usher friends talking to the Chief of Police, a young man by the name of Hubert Aslup. He took me by the arm and escorted me into his office, locked the door and motioned for the ushers to go away. Pointing to our leaflet he said, “You know about everybody makes a living on these missiles around here. These fellows outside are Georgia Crackers, and I brought you in here to warn you that they are going to lynch you, or tar and feather you, or throw you in the river. And I won’t defend you either. If I didn’t have my uniform on I would beat the hell out of you myself. You better start walking out of town.”</p>
                        <p>I explained that I had had the <abbr class="initialism">KKK</abbr> after me near Mobile, <abbr class="postal">Ala.</abbr> before he was born, that I didn’t run then and wasn’t going to run now. The Chief did not believe that I was a Catholic and called me a Communist. I replied that I was an anarchist. He wanted to know if that meant “no cops.” “Yes, and no government and war,” I answered. As I walked the two blocks away from the station I toyed with the idea if it was worthwhile to be beaten up by these ignorant men, but found my feet walking naturally toward the Church. As I reached <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s the police chief eased up behind me and said “Better get your ass out of town or these guys will get you. Go to the Presbyterians. Don’t bother these Catholics, I’m warning you!”</p>
                        <p>I listened to the sermon sitting out on the Church steps and could see the four men waiting across the street for me. I had about ten pounds of literature in my pockets and this would help me sink in the water if they threw me in. Drowning was a quick death and just a choking. And hanging was also a quick death. Folks don’t die of tar and feathers and I didn’t see any pot of tar handy. If they took me away ten miles from town and took my clothes off and beat me up I suppose I could find the other picketers in time. I said a prayer for protection and walked to the sidewalk and commenced to give out leaflets as people left the Church. About five people had received them when the reddest-faced Irish looking usher grabbed me and rushed me over to the other side of the street. Then ensued the old name calling of “Communist;” that I had no right to hand out leaflets with the name Catholic; and if the Bishop knew of it he would have prevented me. I asked the name of the Bishop but they didn’t know. Finally I remembered it was Bishop Hurley of <abbr>St.</abbr> Augustine. They told me that Father LeMay and Chief Alsup had told them “to take me over the hill” and prevent me from handling out leaflets. I said I didn’t believe this. By this time all had come out from the 11 o’clock Mass.</p>
                        <p>As the four ushers were calling me insulting names one man said, “I wouldn’t beat up that old man. You should have respect for age; that will make him a martyr and that is just what the Commies want.” He was the only one of them who took a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> to read. They said that it seemed that the Church and the police couldn’t stop me but they sure could, and the red-faced man said “We’ll take you over the hill and throw you in the ocean just as soon as you make a step to the curb to hand out another leaflet.” I told him I would sit down by the tree and rest a bit until the people came out from noon Mass and then I would give out at least one leaflet.</p>
                        <p>“You’ll go over the hill. We don’t fool around here with such as you!”</p>
                        <p>Just then Chief Alsup and another cop drove up and motioned for me to get into their car. They were taking me to the Mayor’s house and I waited while they conferred with him for a time. When they returned they said they could arrest me for loitering and for disturbing religious services. I replied that I did not disturb any religious service; and that I only disturbed the already disturbed Catholic Vigilantes. They could arrest me for whatever their law said; that I wouldn’t sue them for false arrest for I didn’t believe in courts.</p>
                        <p>“We got to be careful; that’s just what you Commies would do,” the chief replied.</p>
                        <p>By this time we had come to the town of Cocoa and to the Police Station. As I was ushered in a khaki-clad officer in charge said, “If I didn’t have my uniform on I’d beat the hell out of you; you New York Communist.” He repeated this twice again within a few minutes. The officers conferred again in another room for about ten minutes and I could hear them arguing about false arrest, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Finally they told me to take the leaflets out of my pocket and they piled about 100 of them on the desk saying they would distribute them for me. Then they told me to go. Everyone won this game, for I did not chicken and kept my integrity; the Catholic Vigilantes won for I gave out no more leaflets at their Church; the Police won for I could not sue them for false arrest—they didn’t arrest me; they just detained me.</p>
                        <p>The next day the local paper, the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">Tribune</i>, gave a good summary of our ideas, saying also, “The pacifists met with a chilly reception. At <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s Catholic Church in Rockledge, police were summoned to prevent at least one of the group from disturbing services. He was escorted in Cocoa by Police Chief Hubert Alsup and warned to leave town.” Sunday night I spoke at a Negro Baptist Church and Marge Swann spoke in several churches. Bob Lutweiler spoke to the Episcopalians and Methodists and on the whole we had a fine reception instead of the “chilly” one referred to above. The next day Marge and Bob had a conference with the Police Chief of Cocoa. The leaflets were still on that desk and he said there were a couple of things he didn’t agree with in the leaflet: breaking laws and anarchism. He said the Mayor didn’t quite agree with the leaflet either and wanted to see us. We had wanted to have a street meeting but the Mayor offered us the free use the next night of the Municipal Auditorium if we would debate with the Air Force people, but they were not allowed to debate the issue they said, so we had no meeting. Marge and Dick Fichter spoke on the radio the next day. Dick is a charming wild man (without his beard and beret). Harry Scheirer, a Quaker from Philadelphia, dragged his slight body manfully with us. Patricia Parkman, with Fellowship House in Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr> lent her charm to the scene. The Orlando and Miami papers gave us good coverage when we marched in the rain the next day picketing through the air base on the public highway.</p>
                        <p>Dave Dellinger and some others had entered the <abbr class="initialism">AEC</abbr> office in the Washington suburbs, and sitting down refused to move or to eat until Admiral Straus would speak to them. They went for seven days and had a few minutes talk with him at last. This is not good manners and is a negative fasting with which I would not take part. I explained in my picketing leaflet which had the cut of John the Baptist saying “Make Straight the Way of the Lord,”</p>
                        <blockquote><p>I am fasting, not to coerce or embarass the <abbr class="initialism">AEC</abbr> but as a penance for our sinfulness in bombing Hiroshima and Nagasaki and for our continued testing of hydrogen and atomic weapons in our mad race for a supremecy that means only death. I am fasting to awaken the consciences of those who are a part of the war machine, those who are half-hearted pacifists, and those Christians who see no contradiction in following Christ and Caesar.</p></blockquote>
                        <p>Previous to my fast I had hiked a day from Frederick, <abbr class="postal">Md.</abbr> with others on a Peace Walk to Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr> and took part with their picketing on a Sunday. The <abbr class="initialism">AEC</abbr> office was at 1717 H <abbr class="eoc">St.</abbr> I roomed near the Cathedral, went to Mass each morning, then down to buy a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper"><abbr class="initialism">N.Y.</abbr> Times</i>, read it, and rest, and then picket from 9 to 10, resting on the grass in the park by the Roger Smith Hotel half a block away. Then I picketed 20 minutes and rested 40, then to picket during the noon rush until 1:05. Then to rest for the remainder of the afternoon except for the 20 minutes around each hour when the <abbr class="initialism">AEC</abbr> shuttle bus from Germantown would arrive. Thus I picketed four hours and rested four hours. I only missed one rainy day and one day I attended the Hopi hearings with Viets of Hopiland.</p>
                        <p>“You couldn’t be more right than you are. I know as much about the effects of atomic radiation as anyone in this country. Keep up your picketing. Good luck to you,” said an Atomic Energy employee to me on the 28th day of my fast. Three days later Admiral Strauss, who had seen me there daily as he came from their main headquarters remarked, “You look wonderful.” We would mock salute each other in the morning.</p>
                        <p>To those who have never fasted and who are so fearful or so medically-minded that the loss of a pound or of a meal is a major disaster, the announcement that I would fast for 40 days as a penance for our atomic sins brought letters of protest that I was committing suicide. On the 17th day of my fast a man who works at the <abbr class="initialism">AEC</abbr> building quietly told me that he had fasted 62 days with McSwiney, Lord Mayor of Cork, who had fasted 78 days for the freedom of Ireland and died in 1920. He greeted me kindly several times later. Nine others of McSwiney’s followers had fasted 94 days in prison and had lived. Many of the early Christians fasted 60 days in the hot desert. Pythagoras fasted 40 days before he took his exams and he would take no one as a student at the University of Alexandria who had not fasted for 40 days. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr class="name">A.G.</abbr> Walker, a noted Rhodesian singer, in Capetown, Africa, in 1931 fasted for 101 days to lose 63 pounds, as she was much overweight. In a supervised fast a man by the name of Succi ran up the steps of the Eiffel Tower on the 40th day of his fast. Harry Wills, the Negro prizefighter, fasted 30 days each year when he commenced training for a fight. Freddy Welsh, onetime lightweight champion of the world, always started his training for important fights with a week’s fast. The most spectacular achievement was that of Gilman Low, artist and athlete, who in December 1903, at Madison Square Garden before 16,000 people, at the end of an eight-day supervised fast broke nine world records in weight lifting, such as raising 950 pounds three times in four seconds, and raising 2,200 pounds 29 times in 20 seconds. Bob Hoyt of the Knight newspapers who wrote three articles about my fast had asked a leading nutritionist at the University here if I could fast for 40 days without injury. He replied that if I had a strong will it would not hurt me.</p>
                        <p>A young Mormon soldier in uniform asked me questions for half an hour. Art Harvey picketed with me for five days and fasted ten days. Bob Steed fasted in <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> City with me for eight days. Terry McKiernon of Notre Dame, good Catholic anarchist, fasted with me the last nine days. Others in this country and in England wrote about their fasting with me. Mayanna Manion of <abbr>Mt.</abbr> Angel, Oregon, fasted 13 days. Bob Grant of Santa Fe drove by and took me to visit the Little Sisters of Charles de Foucauld who are charwomen at the Catholic University of America. The priests at the Cathedral were very unsympathetic to my fast but Father Coen at the Catholic Information Center downtown had my book and Dorothy’s and prayed for me daily. Virginia Glenn brought my mail to the park at times and planned a talk for me at the Bagdad Restaurant to the Washington Pacifist Fellowship near the end of my fast. And she introduced me to The Venerable Narada, a Buddhist priest whom I came to know fairly well. I listened to their lectures at the Burma and Ceylon Embassies.</p>
                        <p>I lost 31 pounds in my fast although for 11 days I did not lose a pound. Noticing strawberries gave me a hankering for them and I mixed some in a juicer with buttermilk at Dick and Byrd Sweitzers where I stayed for a few days. Dick is secretary to Mormon Congressman Udall from Tucson who is my friend. His wife Lee drove me to Mormon Church and helped me drink the strawberry buttermilk as I broke my fast. I read the lives of Jack London, Ibsen, and the Quaker John Woolman during my fast.</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>Sandstone Prison 8-26—59 to 1-24-60</h3>
                        <h3>“Over the Fence” at Omaha Missile Base</h3>
                        <h3>August 24, 1959</h3>
                        <p>Omaha is the brains of the Missiles, where you touch a button and they go off all over the world. Pacifists whom I know had a project there for several months, most of them going to jail for six months for “going over the fence” in civil disobedience at the air base. Karl Meyer was the Catholic among them and I felt I should offer him my company, so the day after my tax picketing was over I left for Omaha, first stopping in Chicago where Dorothy and I spoke at a meeting of the Quakers. Francis Gorgen, my old time friend from Wisconsin, drove me from Chicago, picking up Janet Burwash who was going to visit her folks in Peoria. Catholics had phoned from Omaha that we should stay with them. The judge had told Arthur Harvey, when he asked him if he had anything to say in court, that he didn’t want to hear it, so I wrote to the judge giving my reasons for being the last of the group to “go over the fence.”</p>
                        <p>Francis drove me out to the Mead Air Base in the morning. Our friends told us that for several days the radio had announced that I was coming from <abbr class="initialism">N.Y.</abbr> City for civil disobedience. We waited awhile at the Mead Base in a line of vehicles until the guard said, “You’re the pacifist; the picketing place is two miles down the road.” We asked a trucker and went down a dirt road to a dead end and across a ditch, noticing tar-paper covered buildings dotted here and there. We asked where the headquarters was and offered a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> to workers but they seemed afraid to take them. Finally a clerical worker took us ceremoniously to the brass at the front gate. They were waiting for us and we had somehow got in the back way. The <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Marshal handed me a typed notice from the head of the Air Base ordering me off the premises, and they opened the locked gate for me to get out. I went out and immediately stepped over the small fence and was officially arrested by Marshall Raab, but no handcuffs or chains were put on me as had been the case with Karl Meyer. The publicity given him had made them more careful. Marshall Raab asked me if I was an anarchist-vegetarian like Arthur Harvey and I replied that I was and in addition I was a Catholic. He said that he had heard an anarchist speak at Hyde Park in London that summer but had not paid much attention and wanted to know if I was a real anarchist. I told him I was, and that I had written a book about it. He wanted to know if he could read it. I told him I had brought it along for the judge and would autograph it for him and the judge and he could have it first. When we came to his office a newspaper man was there and told me that he was tired of writing up about us and would not give me much publicity. Before I could say a word the Marshall said, “He is not in it for publicity; he has reasons; he’s different.” The office secretary spoke well of Marge Swann whom she had taken to Alderson, <abbr class="postal">W. Va.</abbr> prison recently. Francis was allowed to come in to visit me and to be in court at 3 <abbr class="time eoc">p.m.</abbr> The <abbr class="initialism">D.A.</abbr> wanted to make sure that I knew enough to plead guilty and he finally understood that I did not want a lawyer, so my plea of guilty was accepted. Judge Robinson wanted to know if I had anything to say before sentence was pronounced. I asked him if he had read my letter and he said that he had. I told him that I had nothing more to add. He gave me six months with $500 fine and costs, but as I found out later this fine was not “committed,” which meant that I would always owe it but did not haveto sign a pauper’s oath in lieu of payment. Marshall Raab said that he had taken Arthur Harvey to the newly re-opened Sandstone, <abbr class="postal">Minn.</abbr> prison between Minneapolis and Duluth, and I supposed I would be going there instead of with Karl to Springfield, Missouri.</p>
                        <p>Twenty-six prisoners were sleeping on and under bunks and on the floor in a space in a cell tank supposed to be for twelve. It was hot but there was a fan and it could have been worse. The food is miserable as in most county jails. A friend of Mike Gold’s sent word to me from the floor below. After a night and day I was moved to another cell with another prisoner and at 5 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> the next morning he and I and a Negro prisoner were chained and handcuffed and went in a car with a Deputy Marshall and a decrepit, foul-mouthed ancient who got a per diem for helping escort us. We had to drink coffee and eat sandwiches handcuffed in the car, but Marshall Raab had been more considerate with Arthur, taking him unbound into restaurants. In the afternoon we arrived in Sandstone.</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>Sandstone Prison</h3>
                        <p>Sandstone is a town of about 1,500, entirely destroyed by fire in the forest fire of the 90s but now rebuilt. The reservation is several miles out of town and was used mostly for conscientious objectors in the 40s, and later as a state mental hospital, but this year it was reopened as a medium security Federal Prison, with about 50 transfers from Leavenworth, and more coming in from Terra Haute and Milan prisons, with a few like us from the courts. At the time of my entry there were 70 and at the time of my release there were 354. The prison consists of two-story buildings erected around a compound of about two acres in the midst of 3,000 acres of swamp and farm, the latter not being run just now. Mostly we lived in dormitory custody with about forty five in each dorm. E building contains cells where those who have a detainer against them are housed; and then there are 13 solitary cells, painted yellow, upstairs, with a mattress on the floor. Mostly you get regular eats and you can get books from the library to read while in solitary. Newcomers are put in <abbr class="initialism">A</abbr> and <abbr class="initialism">O</abbr> (Admission and Orientation) for three weeks or a month. Here we were two to a cell. I met one fellow who had done time in Parchman, <abbr>Miss.</abbr> where the wife has overnight visits with the husband prisoner each week. (There have been prisons too where the officers bring prostitutes for certain prisoners and make money for themselves.) A couple of farmers were in for feeding corn, which the government had bought for surplus, to their hogs, or for figuring out their income tax differently from the way the government accountants figured. A bookie from the big city became my friend and threatened to reform. Most of the men were in for stealing cars over the state line, many others for peddling dope, quite a number for variations of mail fraud. My one especial friend was an Indian who had stolen a horse. He knew that the horse belonged to a neighbor but being drunk he didn’t care. There were about 100 Negroes, 30 Indians, and half a dozen Mexicans. There was no segregation in the dorms or in the dining hall.</p>
                        <p>One morning we were marched to the front office and given shots at the medical office. I told them that I did not believe in shots but they said they would strap me down and make me take them anyway, and that Arthur had taken them after an argument. So I took them. About a week later we were called up to take more shots. I told the officer that I was not going up to take them and asked to see the Captain. He said to see him at the medical office so I went along. The medical officer kept me until last and grabbing my arm told me to hurry up and take my shots and to argue afterwards. I said that was just the idea and I wanted to see the Captain. Finally he got him on the phone and I said, “Captain Driscoll, there are three things you can do: (1) Give me the shots, (2) Allow me to be a conscientious objector to shots, (3) Place me in solitary for the duration of my time,” the medical myth being that I would carry disease to the others. The Captain had sense enough not to make a martyr out of me so I took the shots after which the medical officer said, “I’ll make you come back and take all the possible damn shots.”</p>
                        <p>But in a few days when I went before the Classification Board the medical officer was all smiles (he had given me the shots and could afford to smile). Warden Meier who is a pleasant quiet man entangled in government red tape said that he understood my radical ideas and asked about the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. I gave him our ideas and history. He wanted to know if there was anything I wouldn’t do around the prison. I told him I wouldn’t kill chickens and he had better not put me to teaching history or I would teach it radical as hell. I said that just as Kruschchev and Eisenhower could disagree yet coexist, so could I do my time graciously if that was the way they wanted to run things. I was told to go to the Educational Department and be ready to help set up the school when the educational director arrived. Meanwhile I helped Arthur set up the library as he set it up with some peculiar classifications of his own. Later with the approval of the director we ordered several hundred liberal books including all of Jack London, Erich Fromm, and Aldous Huxley. The warden read my book and liked it and I allowed him to have it for the guards’ library, as it was not allowed in our library, at least while I was there. We have two copies of Dorothy’s book in the library. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Durham, an active Southern Baptist from the El Reno Reformatory, was my boss as educational director for a month. He was liberal and had never met a radical who was a Christian. He took pains to understand my pacifism and wanted to read my book so I had my mother send him one. (I have half a dozen of my books in her attic for Judges, Wardens, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Or if a Pope or a Cardinal wants one I ought to have one handy.) The present educational director, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earhart of McNeil’s Island Reformatory, is a quiet liberal who understands our ideas, and he was friendly to Arthur and me. One day the Warden brought <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Bolton from Sandstone to see me. I had just discussed with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Peterson, the genial guard at the library, about gallows not hanging, or prison doors not locking themselves, and that when people refused to be judges, hangmen, guards, wardens, or madames of houses of prostitution, then these things would cease to exist. I had said that all Judges, <abbr class="initialism">D.A.</abbr>’s, Wardens, <abbr>etc.</abbr> ought to do thirty days in a regular jail. And he said that if we prisoners were Warden for a day we would see what a Warden had to do put up with. I told this to the Warden and said I supposed he had a time with the old time sadistic guards.</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>Prison Routine</h3>
                        <p>Lights on at 6:30 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> and breakfast from 7 to 7:30 in the cafeteria-like dining room with four to a small table. You can choose with whom you eat. I was generally with my Indian friends. Always hot and dry cereal, coffee, toast, oleo, and some kind of stewed fruit. At times pancakes, french toast, or scrambled eggs. On a Sunday or a holiday we have just coffee at 8 and “Brunch” which is lunch and breakfast at 10. Generally two strips of bacon then. To work at 8 and lunch at 11:30 which consisted of potatoes, meat, several vegetables, and jello, cake, pie, pudding, and tea or in the summer Kool-aid. To work at 12:30 and to count in your dorm at 4:30 when the
whistle blows on work days. Supper at 5 to 5:30 which is plentiful. Corn on the cob in season, and generally too much starch. Cornbread at times which was good, but the whitebread was not as good as in the New York prisons, it being more like storebread. I ate very little starch and Arthur and I gave our meat and fish to those who asked for it. I fasted from Thursday night to Saturday noon or until after Mass on Saturday morning. Count again at 9:30 and lights out at 10:30, but at times those who wanted television could listen until later in another room.</p>
                        <p>After supper on week nights prisoners can go to the library or to classes until around 9 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> I worked extra at nights and on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays in the library, and while I know just about the exact location on the shelf of each book I never got to read much as I was busy shuffling Zane Grey and other rubbish for the prisoners as they returned and took out books. We are not allowed to visit a prisoner in another dorm. Some guards are more fussy about this than others. We had a skating rink and hockey games, and in good weather baseball, volleyball, football, and tossing horseshoes. At this latter Arthur and I played and ran about even, but the Indian could make a ringer nearly every time. We played 107 games of Scrabble and I only won ten, so there is no doubt that Arthur is smarter than I. You can buy a certain amount of candy, cigarettes, <abbr>etc.</abbr> at commissary and afterwards there is a scramble to pay gambling debts. Some of the most religious were the worst gamblers.
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>Religion</h3>
                        <p>Father Smith told us that he did not want us to consider him as a Chaplain, but as members of his parish, which we were geographically. He has two parishes and does not have much time to confer with us but he is kindly. I attended Protestant services with a Lutheran friend, not taking part except to sing <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">Faith of Our Fathers, in dungeons dim</i>, twice. A choir leader sang a song, <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">When God Forsakes You Turn To Your Friend</i>. He likely meant when your friend forsakes you to turn to God, but it rhymed better I suppose. And he also sang about “when the waters cover the sea.” I always thought that they covered the land, but this was another rhyme. For a minister to be a Chaplain in the armed forces or in prison and accept the pay, and in some cases wear the uniform of the officers, is in my mind as bad as to have a Prohibitionist wear the bartender’s apron behind the bar and hand out temperance leaflets. Churches ought to pay the salaries of their Chaplains and then they could be independent. For if they don’t know what goes on they cannot be of much use, and if they do know and do nothing about it, that is worse yet. I know of cases (not in Sandstone) where Catholics did not go to confession because they felt that the Chaplain was too friendly with the Warden. They may have been wrong but this feeling kept them away from confession.</p>
                        <p>Later in Milwaukee the chief probation officer, who is a friend of mine, told me of social workers and others collecting money under the name of some club and paying the salary of the court Chaplain. In this manner prisoners would not feel that he was biased for any especial church and certainly he was then not an arm of the State. Here the Huber Plan whereby certain prisoners work at their regular jobs and live at night in the jail and turn all of their salary in to feed their families, or to pay fines and also their keep at the jail, is a system. This is a terrible strain on a prisoner and under creditable officials it can be a help, but a jail is always a jail.</p>
                        <p>Many of the guards in Sandstone are recruited from the farming community. Most of them seem to be afraid of their jobs, of us, and of themselves. Some are naturally kindly and others find ways to needle us with regulations as to how we fold a blanket, happen to look in at another dorm, or not follow some silly regulation to the letter of the law. Guards are like pacifists, anarchists, vegetarians, Catholics, and others; they can be kind, generous, intelligent, and courageous, but they can also be arrogant, perverse, selfish, greedy, and tricky.</p>
                        <p><em>“There are two kinds of people in the world: those who have done time and those who haven’t,”</em> said a lifer to me in Atlanta prison in 1917. In prison and out of prison about a third of the people are stool-pigeons who are ready to name names for a profit to themselves. In a recent issue of the prison paper in Leavenworth there was a reprint of an article by Judge Lebowitz in New York City praising the Russian prisons that he had visited. Here families could visit and prisoners were paid the going rate for their work. Nothing was said about political prisoners. Like Martin who wrote, <i epub:type="se:name:publication:book">Break Down the Walls</i> that Carol Gorgen reviewed in the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> once, I am not interested in making bigger and better prisons. The current issue of the Atlanta prison paper says in an editorial that 95% of the men there are recidivists, that is they come back again to prison. It would be around 85% in Sandstone. I know men there who have been in jail for many years and have not learned a thing. I know others who have been caught in a mail fraud which is no worse than regular business who will now be more careful and who will not knowingly break the law again. I know kids from Milan who will likely go in and out of jails for years to come. None of the officials ever used the word “rehabilitate” without excusing themselves, for they know it is a farce. Attitudes towards prisoners range from the sentimentalist who says that “there are no bad boys,” and that most prisoners are incarcerated unjustly, to sadists like <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Edgar Hoover who wants more jails and more punishment. There are bad boys and bad people who knowingly choose to do evil. Jesus gave us the method of overcoming evil when he said to the woman caught in sin, “He without sin among you first cast a stone at her.” If the early Christians went to court they were not allowed to go to Communion for six months, and if they were in the army and killed a man they had to do penance for ten years. Since the time of Constantine the Church has tried to cooperate with the State and capital punishment, prisons, and war. All this is done in the name of Christ while Christ is denied. The darkest place in the world is a prison and this is where light is needed. When I left Sandstone I told the Warden and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Earhart, who had already met Dorothy who had come to meet me, that the prison had not hurt me any, and perhaps I had helped in my attitude of being the kind of radical who does not believe in prisons at all but who while there tries to give his fellow prisoners the idea that there is a different way of looking at life, on the inside and on the outside. My time in prison was not wasted and if in the future I do up to five years for civil disobedience I think it would be time well spent on my part. I often say that a fellow who is any good on the outside does much better on the inside, for as Debs said, “While there is a lower class I am in it; while there is a soul in prison I am not free.”</p>
                        <p>Father Casey, Janet Burwash, and Bill Henry visited me. I was restricted to write to seven approved correspondents. Upon my release I had 640 Christmas cards from over the world.</p>
                        <p>There would not be one chance in a million of arriving at the number 7438 if you chose four digits from 4 to 84,000, but the current issue of the Atlanta prison paper had an interesting writeup about how a prisoner enters prison and what is done from time to time. They might have taken any number as a sample but they chose this one—7438, which was my prison number in 1917 there. The Milwaukee papers tell of the acting Postmaster who “mishandled” $17,000 and was fined $1,000 and placed on five years probation. I slept near a Negro from Milwaukee who got five years for a minor theft. The <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">New York Times</i> of 6-22-60 tells of Judge Lester <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Salter of Chicago giving two ex-policemen three years probation for stealing $1,800 worth of appliances, saying that their take home pay of $350 a month was not enough to live on, and that when off duty and stealing they “were engaged in free enterprise.”</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>Polaris anti atomic sub protest</h3>
                        <h3>June 6 TO 19, 1960</h3>
                        <p>Brad Lyttle had organized this Action to protest the atomic subs which with 16 <abbr class="initialism">H</abbr>-bombs can kill fifty million people. The leader of the march was Adrian Maas, a young Hollander, now living in New Jersey. He has lived a bit in South Africa and is the second Christian Scientist pacifist whom I have met. He graduated from their college, Principia, near <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis and argued with them for years, and with his draft board. He is a fine young man and deserves much credit for fighting the patriots in his church nearly alone.</p>
                        <p>The march had started June 10th from the Battery in New York, and Hugh Madden of our group had started with it then. Charlie Butterworth and I caught up with it at Columbia University the next day, Saturday, he coming back after a few hours and I continuing with the others to New Rochelle. Each night we were provided shelter with friends. I was fasting but the walk of around 20 miles a day was no more than I did regularly when picketing the tax man. My sign said, “Yes, for Life and the Green Revolution; No for Death and the Polaris bomb.” Groups of students joined, us in the towns and the police often escorted us cordially through the towns, but the nearer we got to New London the more hostile the police and the people were. In one town two beautiful 16 year old Quaker twins, Merry and Mercy, walked with us and Hugh and I were fortunate to stay at their house that night. We were called Communists in many towns, but in three instances I gave the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> to Catholics who were questioning us and made friends of them.</p>
                        <p>Half a dozen atheistic anarchistic students, two Quakers, and a schismatic Western Orthodox young priest by the name of Itkin were the walkers that went most of the way. Hugh did not like to walk with “unbelievers” so soloed on the side or forward or backward. Scott Herrick and Joel Greenberg had sailed in a sloop from Cape May, and Harry Purvis, John Davenport, and Bill Henry had rowed from Manhattan. And Arthur Harvey had met us on the way. In New London on the next Saturday dozens of folks came from New York and Boston to help us: Janice Smith and her children, Pat McMahon, Dave Dellinger, Ralph DiGia, and Bob Gussner.</p>
                        <p>About thirty of us marched over a long bridge and got wet in a soaking rain on the way to Groton and the Electric Boat works. Here hundreds of workers were gathered in a narrow street by the factory entrance with angry looks toward us. We made the mistake of twice huddling in a meeting before continuing our march. When we got to the worst of the crowd a 14-year-old youth by the name of Timothy Hutchinson from Cambridge, Massachusetts was at the head of the line and I was second. A saloon keeper tore Timothy’s sign and tramped on it, and tore mine and a <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> I gave him, and so on with the others. Three of the kid anarchists hurried back to give out more leaflets and when Brad went to tell them we were going home someone from behind hit him on the jaw. We gave out thousands of leaflets in the park when the Harvard Yale boat races were going on, and later that night we had a meeting in our office at night where some workers attended and gave patriotic arguments. The action went on until the first of September but I had tax picketing in August, and this was enough on the Polaris front.</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>Miscellaneous Picketing</h3>
                        <p>There has been a strike on at Kohler <abbr>Co.</abbr> in Wisconsin for five years. They are a paternalistic concern paying good wages but not believing in unions. Both sides had committed violence. Bob Steed, Deane, and I picketed the sales room on Park <abbr>Ave.</abbr> once a month for years and when I was speaking in Wisconsin I picketed the Kohler plant with my friend Francis Gorgen and two former employees, Bohemian Catholics.</p>
                        <p>We have picketed the Spanish Embassy, the Spanish Travel Bureau, and ships in port, protesting against the Franco regime where Catholic as well as anarchist students are tortured. At the Travel Bureau I told them that we were anarchists similar to Francisco Ferrer the educator whom the Church and the State did to death in 1909. They remembered that.</p>
                        <p>With Ann Marie Stokes we have picketed the South African representatives here. Every Saturday in the summer of 1960 we help <abbr class="acronym">CORE</abbr> (Committee On Racial Equality) picket Woolworth’s. Bob Steed fasted for 46 days and picketed the courts here a couple of hours each day on the Chessman case, and he and I and others picket Sing Sing from noon until 10 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> when there was an execution there. Someone has to offset the old eye for an eye mentality of the traditional Catholic clergy who seem to be the only ones to advocate the death penalty or to call for more punishment when the question is up in the legislature. Some non-Catholic friends of ours were lobbying at Trenton against capital punishment and when they saw two priests there they innocently thought they were there on the same mission, but the priests knew nothing of such a bill; they were there to lobby for bingo. Each December for years I have picketed the White House in Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr> about political prisoners.</p>
                        <p>December 2, 1960 Mary Lathrop and I picketed Sing Sing from 4:30 until 10 <abbr class="time eoc">p.m.</abbr> A young man had hit an older man in a fight on the Bowery and the old man died. The young man was persuaded to plead guilty and told he would get clemency. As it was he did not have a good lawyer and was to be executed that night. Hundreds of people came up from town and read our signs. One guard said that there was hardly any capital punishment now, only four or five a year. Some guards coming to work took our leaflets and were cordial. We had walked the 72 steps up the wooden stairway which is a shortcut to the prison from the streets below. At ten minutes to ten we said the Rosary and at ten when the lights went dim we were praying for the soul of the young man. We did not know for sure whether he had been executed until we read it in the paper next day. I cry very seldom, but all the next day I was in tears.</p>
                        </section>
                        <section epub:type="subchapter">
                        <h3>Other New York Meetings</h3>
                        <p>Ordinarily a prophet does not speak much in his own town but New York City is so big that I speak often in churches, schools, and special groups. The Quakers have groups of students whom they take to the <abbr class="initialism">UN</abbr>, different embassies, and as a final treatment to the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, or at times I have spoken to their groups in an all day seminar with others such as Erich Fromm. All of these speakers believed in patching up the system so it was well that someone was there to give them hope when their patchwork failed.</p>
                        <p>I had a three-cornered discussion between Sid Stein of the Communist Party and Sam Karp of the Socialist Labor Party at a forum. Also a discussion at Hofstra College in Long Island between Arnold Johnson of the Communist Party, Lynne Trugeon defending capitalism, and myself with the anarchist position. And twice at Hunter College Hyde Park Day where speakers from all parties, except the Liberal who would not associate with Communists, spoke and later had a soapbox under a tree for hours. This later meeting was on May 4th: Cardinal Spellman’s birthday; Karl Marx’s being the 5th. The present line of the Communists is to be reasonable and historical and not especially radical. The Socialist Labor Party is of course the oldest Socialist Party, more like a fundamentalist church in its dogmatism, purity, and absolutely no sense of humor. In an editorial they called me a “Parlor Radical.” They are always well financed from the capitalist system which they disavow and never risk going to jail which might disrupt their organizing. In all of these meetings none of the radicals mentioned the basic Marxian principles, so I gave them:<dl><dt>The Economic Interpretation of History.</dt><dd>If a Catholic sheepherder in the west clips wool and a Catholic stockbroker in Wall Street clips coupons, they may both pray alike, but their outlook on life is different because they make their living in a different way. This does not hold good for every human being but in general it is true.</dd><dt>Surplus Value.</dt><dd>If a man makes $40 a day for his employer and gets back in return but $10, then he can only buy back that much and the surplus piles up and we have depressions and wars. The capitalist system commenced to fall apart in 1914. I doubt if it lasts until 2014. and maybe not until 1984. I would not push it for it is already falling: billions spent to pay farmers for not growing wheat, corn, <abbr>etc.</abbr> and to store this surplus—with half the world underfed. We don’t deserve to survive.</dd><dt>The Class Struggle.</dt><dd>Between those who work for a living and those who own for a living, as Scott Nearing says, there is a struggle. All this the Catholic anarchist believes with other radicals. But Communists believe that the way to solve this problem is to have a Dictatorship of the Proletariat, and afterwards the state will wither away and we will have a stateless society which would be anarchism. Anarchists do not believe that any state will wither away and they agree with Lord Acton, the Catholic who fought the declaration of infallibility by Pius <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX<span>, that “Power corrupts and absolute power tends to corrupt absolutely.”</dd></dl>
                        <p>I spoke to several meetings of Communists to greet my old friend Elizabeth Gurley Flynn when she was released from Alderson prison for violation of the Smith Act. The Communists are realistic in most of the world but somehow here their wires are twisted for they think that by opening their meetings with <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">The Star Spangled Banner</i> they are proving their patriotism. Neither Dorothy nor I would stand up when on the stage when this was sung. I always told them that they couldn’t sing it, and did not believe it, and were not fooling anyone; that next time they invited me I hoped they would all sing the <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">Red Flag</i> like we used to in the old days. The youngsters applauded me but the old folks were puzzled; they couldn’t leave their party line. Howard Fast had asked me to speak at their May Day meeting on Union Square but I told him I might front for them but I would do it in my own way. So in 1960 when some Hunter College students asked me to speak at a 4th of July Anti-Japanese Treaty rally I did so. I kidded them about the <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">Star Spangled Banner</i> and then I said: “When anyone is for peace, justice, freedom, or higher wages he is called ‘Communist.’ That is an honor and I am glad to be with you today. When people are for good things they are never called ‘Christian’ or ‘Catholic’ for we have not earned the right to be so called. But there was a time when being a Christian and a Catholic meant something: that was when if you went court you were not allowed to take Communion for six months and if a soldier who was a Christian killed any one he was not allowed to go to Communion for ten years. All over the world where we find a tyranny we find the Catholics supporting this tyranny; they have forgotten the message of the early Christians. We are trying to make our Church have the old-time message of the early Christians. And last year the hierarchy put thumbs down on the efforts of the poorly paid Catholic Puerto Rican hospital workers here to have a union. Although if I was in Russia I wouldn’t last long, being an anarchist, but here today I am happy to be with comrades who are not only against this Japanese Treaty, which is the subject of the day, but for other items of justice.”</p>
                        <p>Another time I met with the Trotskyite leader Myra Tanner Weiss at a forum. Her grandfather Tanner was an old-time Mormon. I spoke at the College of Complexes, which was a meeting place where liquor was served. An anarchist, Slim Brundege, has a place like this in Chicago also where radicals and others can speak. When I had finished, a drunken Irishman got up saying that he was an athiest and worked on the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:newspaper">New York Times</i>, and he wanted to know what kind of a so-and-so God I believed in: the Catholic God, the Mohammedan God, the Buddhist God, The Mormon God, the Jewish God, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> I told him, “Folks, this man is all mixed up; he doesn’t know God is an Irishman.”</p>
                        <p>The latest instance of pacifist action is that of the young Christian Science leader of the Polaris march to New London, Connecticut, Adrian Maas, who in August of 1960 was approached at the pacifist headquarters by three sailors who said: “You are a pacifist?”</p>
                        <p>“Yes.”</p>
                        <p>“That means that if I hit you in the face you would not hit back.”</p>
                        <p>“Yes.” So Adrian was hit three times in the face by the sailor. Meanwhile, Julius Jacobs, a pacifist, stood by. To defend Adrian with fists was wrong, and he did not have the words to say or the right action to prevent this assault. He did, however, have the pacifist principle to not use violence.</p>
                        <p>“Now you would shake hands with me after all this?” asked the sailor.</p>
                        <p>“Surely,” said Adrian, whereupon the sailor hit him in the face again. Adrian and Julian have been strengthened by knowing that they were true to their principles. Whether I would have said anything or done anything in a pacifist manner to stop this violence I do not know. The pacifist technique is not a recipe to live forever, but it is a way of life, that if lived, goes from victory to victory rather than from defeat to defeat.</p>
                        <p>As I have said before, he who gets there fustest with the mostest will win, so if your loved one is attacked you should have a weapon to defend her. To be without a weapon is not to be a pacifist; it is to be an inefficient militarist. To pick up an ink bottle or use your fists to defend someone may prove that you are brave, but if you desire to defend someone, all you do is to aggravate the attacker and provoke added violence. Pacifism is to be used only by pacifists. As a last resort one could place his body between that of the weapon and the attacker and deflect the blow if there was an opportunity to do so.</p>
                        <p>Theologically speaking, if one is in a state of grace he is ready to die, while the attacker is obviously not ready to die. It could be, if you die as a pacifist, as Stephen did without throwing back any stones, by this very action you might be able to awaken your attacker, as Saul was awakened. God knows, you do not.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
