<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>Chapter 16</h2>
                                <h3>In the Marketplace</h3>
				<h3>New York City</h3>
				<h3>1953⁠–⁠1961</h3>
			</header>
                        <p>Tom Sullivan, associate editor of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>, gave the above title to my activities on the streets of New York City. As a salesman I understand the value of being at the same place at the same time with the same article for sale, and not to jump around, or have a perpetual “gone to lunch sign” in your window. There is another thing that I have learned which is that the wider the sidewalk where you are standing the less likely it is that anyone will break through the line of moving people and buy from you. Also if people are burdened with shopping packages they are not likely to put them down and buy a paper. Also if people are rushing to make a subway to get home they would not take five dollar bills if someone was handing them out. If there are four people selling one block apart they will sell more than if scattered.</p>
                        <p>During the Fall and Spring season there are free lectures on Monday night at Cooper Union, and from 9:45 to 10:45 as many as 2,000 people may emerge. It is true that many just go in there to get warm. In 1920 <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Sargent Cram of Peace House, a wealthy pacifist, and a descendent of Peter Cooper, had planned a meeting where Senator Borah would speak. He was three quarters of an hour late and she asked me to get up and talk until he came. I can’t remember what I said but I held the crowd. Students and “Bowery philosophers” often interrogate me as I am selling <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s there and we go to the all night restaurant across the Bowery and discuss radicalism. One person cannot take care of such a crowd, so Patricia Rusk helped me for a time and others around the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> came along. Once we met a seminarian who had formerly been in the army and who said that he could love the enemy and kill him at the same time. Theological discussion had gone on for a long time when Pat looked up at the seminarian and innocently said, “You say this to me now, and you tell this to God when you die.” That was the end of the conversation.</p>
                        <p>Tuesday from noon until 2 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> I hold forth at Pine and Nassau, a block north of Wall and Broad where I formerly soapboxed. This is a narrow corner and Catholics coming to and from Our Lady of Victory Church two blocks to the east on Pine have an opportunity to know about the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. A well-dressed man said hello to me, mentioning my name, and I said that I couldn’t remember him.</p>
                        <p>“Oh you wouldn’t know me. I slept on the floor at your place all one winter and saw you come and go. Booze had dragged me down in the gutter of the Bowery. I had lost my job and family. But with you folks I sobered up, then went to the <abbr class="initialism">AA</abbr>, and now everything is fine.”</p>
                        <p>I meet people who have heard me speak on the street years ago. Several guards from the banks have bought from me. At times I have had young folks, seminarians, and visitors come down and each one take a corner so that the name “Catholic Worker” resounded. On snowy days I did not sell so many papers. I always have a place handy where I can get warm. The Watchman in one bank chased us, but the others were more cordial. I took friends to see the stock exchange. I suppose it is some old Fenian blood, but I felt an urge when looking over the balcony at the thieves quarreling over their loot, to have a bag of feathers and throw them all over the place, as one pacifist from Kansas did twice among the Congressmen in Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr> “First time I ever bought a paper from the editor of a paper,” said a customer to me.</p>
                        <p>9:45 to 10:30 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> Tuesdays at New School, 12th <abbr>St.<abbr> near 6th <abbr class="eoc">Ave.<abbr> Very few Catholics attend this liberal school of adult education but I have many friends there who tell others about the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. They accepted my book in their library. One night a cab driver waiting for his “fare” who was at the school said, “There’s a guy in there talking against you folks, name of Blanshard.” I didn’t believe him, but in a few minutes a man whom I knew by his moustache was Paul Blanshard, the professional anti-Catholic, came out.</p>
                        <p>“Have a Catholic Worker, Mr. Blanshard,” I said handing him one.</p>
                        <p>“How much?” he asked.</p>
                        <p>“Nothing, you need it bad,” was my reply. He gave me a nickel.</p>
                        <p>A man who had known Vachel Lindsay in the old days talked with me for a few minutes, and when he heard that I had attended Hiram College he was glad to know that I quoted my favorite poem of his to the students often: <i epub:type="se:name:publication:poem">The Leaden-Eyed</i>. <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine">The Village Voice</i> had a picure of me selling <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s there, and later when I was in Sandstone prison they said I was not able to sell <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s for a time and folks had better subscribe for the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> as they were missing something good.</p>
                        <p>Wednesday from noon to 4:30 at Fordham University Uptown 190th <abbr class="eoc">St.</abbr> This is about the noisiest place in New York City, what with the elevated, the Boston Post Road whizzing by with trucks, and students running like mad to make a train. In many other campuses there are a dozen places where students come and go, but here you can get them all at once as they come out. One student liked Eichenberg’s drawing of the six workers and bought 300 <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s in order to send them as Christmas Greetings to his friends. I have met hundreds of nuns and priests from over the country who are visiting or going to school at Fordham. And every day many students ask me questions about <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> ideas. And in traveling over the country speaking, priests who have met me when they were seminarians at Fordham will tell of the cold days when we both shivered in the wind, they as they came down the quarter of mile walk to the street, and I as I buffeted the wind on the street. One priest was talking to me and later that day he told me that his superior had noticed us together and had said, “Don’t encourage that Hennacy, for after a student hears him it takes five years to get him back in the groove.”</p>
                        <p>14th Street and Broadway, Thursday, 6 to 8 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> (and for years noon to 2 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> but in 1960 picketing Woolworth’s at that time.) This is a cosmopolitan place where you meet every kind of person. It is also a very noisy place, and very windy. Competition here is great, for two or three street merchants will be shouting their wares and looking for a cop, for they are not allowed to do business without a license, and the city will not give them a license. I have witnessed one fellow selling toys get pinched four times in two hours, but he kept right on selling. I have made many valuable contacts here.</p>
                        <p>“Give me a dime. The fellow down the street says for you to give me a dime,” said a short fellow with a string tie. I gave him one.</p>
                        <p>“Make it a quarter,” he said cheerfully, and like a rabbit before a snake I was charmed and handed it over. A few weeks later he came into our office and said to Dorothy, “Here is $2. Ammon loaned me 35¢ recently.”</p>
                        <p>Drunks who hate Catholics, and sober people who despise us, call me “Communist” and say they are going to call the <abbr class="initialism">FBI</abbr>. Spanish Priests who are Fascists hurry by not looking my way. One pious woman had just come from Mass and wanted to know if the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> had an imprimatur. I told her that only diocesion or Order papers had an imprimatur, and that there were many papers printed by lay people. “Ask a priest about us; here comes one,” and I turned to see our own Father McCoy whom I had never met down this way before. He of course told her we were the best.</p>
                        <p>43rd and Broadway, Friday noon until 2 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> enormous crowds pass by here. I am really part of the pillar by the Peerless store, so am not pushed around by the crowd. A young man told me that I had a kind face and that I must be a very good man. I told him that I was not a “goody-goody” but I aim to do the best I could, and not the second best.</p>
                        <p>“I’m in such a fix that any way I turn I am in a fix. I know if you would say a prayer for me it would help.”</p>
                        <p>“What’s your name?” I asked.</p>
                        <p>“Jimmy,” he answered.</p>
                        <p>“Alright, I’ll pray for you at Mass each morning,” was my reply.</p>
                        <p>Going home I stopped at a market to get some yogurt for a friend and the manager came running out shouting, “What did you steal. Let me search you. You look like a crook. My man saw you stealing something.”</p>
                        <p>I told him to search me and he did so but found nothing. How am I going to please the public? One man wants me to pray for him, and another thinks I am a crook. A year later Jimmy greeted me, “Better keep on praying Hennacy, I’m just making it by the ragged edge.”</p>
                        <p>I am always telling success stories but there is once that I had to admit defeat. A tall Irish drunk came up and asked me if the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> had an imprimatur. I told him it didn’t need to have one. Somehow in his befuddled mind he though I must not be a good Catholic if I sold a paper not formally approved by the Church. So he said give me some, and took a dozen and commenced to shout: “Catholic Worker, free copy. No imprimatur.” And pointing to me he added, “Don’t buy from this jerk.” I couldn’t argue with a drunk man and I do not believe in calling a cop. I thought he would tame down, but he kept on for about ten minutes and no one took a free copy from him, those who knew me took papers and paid me for them. I got tired of this and thought if I walked quickly around the block I might lose him. Half way down the block as I neared <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes he caught up with me and whispered in my ear: “I am your persecutor! I am your persecutor!”</p>
                        <p>I walked faster around the block and looking back did not see him. I stopped in a restaurant for a cup of coffee, but before it was served he was beside me saying again, “I am you persecutor!” and he handed a copy of the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> to the waitress saying, “Free copy; no imprimatur.” I walked out and back to 43rd and he followed me. I had 15 minutes yet before quitting time, but I was defeated, and I went home. I never saw him again.</p>
                        <p>A lady coming from Church wanted to know if the Church supported the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> and I told her it was not for us or against us, and to ask some priest about it. Just then I saw a priest walking our way and I said, “Ask him.” And again it was our friend Father McCoy who was on hand to reassure the good woman that the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr> was good for her soul.</p>
                        <p>At times I wear sandals that friends give me. A kind old man saw me thus attired and said that he would come back and bring me a pair of shoes that he thought would fit me. I thanked him and said that I had shoes at home. Several times innocent Catholics who hear the name Catholic as I shout will stop and buy a paper and say “God bless you. I am glad to see someone besides a Jehovah’s Witness on the streets selling papers.” Yet at other times Catholics will say it gives the Church a bad name to be out on the street. At times Protestant ministers, seminarians, and even high school students such as 16-year-old Judy Shafer, who played hookey from school for the aid raid demonstration, will stop and help me sell <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s.</p>
                        <p>A Jewish man who often buys a paper from me here told me of his eight-year-old boy who was showing a neighboring Irish boy how to hold a bat. This boy did not want to be shown and said, “You can’t show me anything, you dirty Jew!” In a sober and innocent manner the Jewish boy replied, “You have committed a mortal sin.”</p>
                        <p>“Why don’t you get a job?” asked a kindly elderly man.</p>
                        <p>“I don’t need any,“ I replied, “for I work for my keep at the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>.”</p>
                        <p>“I’m a retired policeman with a pension, and I make $65 a week on an easy job.”</p>
                        <p>“We believe in living poor near the Bowery,” I told him.</p>
                        <p>“I am happy and I want you to be happy and have a job too,” was his rejoinder.</p>
                        <p>I told him to read the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> and see how we could be happy without bosses. He wanted to know how much the paper cost. I advised it was a penny and he replied that he didn’t have any money on him, so I said to read it and pay me next time. I never saw him again. An Irish woman bought four of my books and offered me an Irish sweepstakes ticket for free. I told her that I did not believe in gambling, bingo, chances on Pontiacs, <abbr>etc.</abbr> for this was the something-for-nothing idea that was the basis of exploitation and slavery. An atheist stopped and said that the Catholic Church was the source of more evil in the world than any other institution. He did not call the Church the Whore of Babylon as fundamentalist Protestants call Catholics. I believe in putting my worst foot forward, and after that my best foot, so I replied: “Sure, compared to the good it is supposed to do, the Catholic Church is the cause of much evil, by watering down the Sermon on the Mount, by justifying wars and exploitation, by ransoming slaves but seldom opposing slavery; by insisting on married people living together midst fighting, malice and hatred, and the Jansenist idea on sex: expecting men and women to live together in ‘self-control’ when this advice often comes from the mouths of clergy who never could be accused of any self-control in eating and drinking. I suppose if all this accumulated misery was on one scale it might seem to out balance the good that the lives of saintly nuns and priests do in consoling the wife of a drunkard, the mother of wayward children, the man yoked for life with a termigant, the nursing of the sick, and all the works of mercy. The Church as a whole, as Monsignor Guardini has said, is the Cross on which Christ is crucified, for in His name they deny Him, but yet through the Church comes a <abbr>St.</abbr> Joan and a <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis of Assisi and all the saints down through the ages. So while only God knows how the scales balance, I would venture that there is more good than evil.”</p>
                        <p><abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s Cathedral, 8 to 10 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> Sundays. I am across the street, for the people seem to come out in a flutter or in a daze. Many pass me by but I do meet folks from all over the world who know of the <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>, and others who are surprised to learn about us. The priests never bothered me here but I have had to educate a few cops as to this being a free country. On very cold days I have a few friends who invite me for a cup of tea after 10 <abbr class="time eoc">a.m.</abbr> The parades, swinging of flags, playing of <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">Star Spangled Banner</i> and <i epub:type="se:name:music:song">Onward Christian Soldiers</i>, and the visiting dignitaries, and the whole spirit of obeisance to Mammon makes this an odd place for a radical. I did go to Mass there at 8 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> for years, generally being one of the first to take Communion in order to get out and sell <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s. Once the priest handed me the paten and I officiated as his server for twenty minutes before Cardinal Spellman and the Cardinal from Australia who was visiting. (This ought to get me inside the pearly gates.)</p>
                        <p><abbr>St.</abbr> Francis of Assisi, near Penn Station, 11 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> to 1:30 Sunday. From 1954 through 1958 I sold <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s here. One priest who acted more like a cop than a priest shouted at me and Pat or whoever was helping me sell <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s to get away. I was to the side of the entrance and would have moved down aways if asked to do so in a civil manner. The priest said he would call a cop and I told him to do so. I showed the cop the Supreme Court decision as to my right and he said I had the right to sell the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> any place, but suggested that as we were all Catholics and for the sake of peace would I move down a bit. I told him that out of courtesy to the Church I would move down, and I did. Again a visiting missionary priest said I was not allowed to sell the <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i> in <abbr class="postal">N.Y.</abbr> City, and that he would call a cop if I didn’t go. I told him this had been tried before, and if he didn’t believe it to ask inside. He didn’t bother me again. For the past two years I have been attending the 10:30 Uniate Byzantine Rite at <abbr>St.</abbr> Michaels Mass back of old <abbr>St.</abbr> Patricks, near us on Mulberry Street. I like the singing, which is done more by Irish than Russians. The Czar could be blessed for all I understand it but the sermons are honestly religious and no political propaganda against the Communists and for capitalism.</p>
                        <p>Julie Lien, a girl from Ohio, was with us for a time and helped me give out <i epub:type="se:name:publication:magazine"><abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr></i>s once a month at the National Maritime Union. Finally their goon squad came and chased us. One of them grabbed her papers and she took them back and sweetly said, “One at a time, Mister,” as she gave him a <abbr class="initialism">CW</abbr>. We had fed these men in 1936 at the time of the waterfront strike and had been thanked by their leader, but now the line is to make a bargain with capitalism. I have enough to do fighting ordinary cops and the State, so I left this labor front.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
