<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Editor’s Note</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section id="editors" epub:type="preamble">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Editor’s Note</h2>
			</header>
                        <blockquote class="epigraph"><p>
                        “I pay no attention to rules of grammar but go by the sound and feeling of what I write.” ―Ammon Hennacy
                        </p></blockquote>
                        <p>
                         In assembling this ebook, I relied first on the work I had already done to create the ebook version of Hennacy’s earlier work, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Autobiography of a Catholic Anarchist</i>, which duplicates most of the first eleven chapters of this book. In doing so, I may have inadvertently missed some changes that were made between the two works. The material that went into that first book, and the material that was added to make this one, came from various sources that themselves were composed with a variety of styles and standards. They were only coarsely edited for the books. I have made what I believe to be improvements to the original text for this edition. For example:
                        </p>
                        <ul>
                         <li>I corrected typos and misprints when I found them.</li>
                         <li>I modernized spelling.</li>
                         <li>I used italics instead of all-caps to denote titles of publications, and made other typographical improvements of this sort.</li>
                         <li>I improved and standardized the punctuation, in particular ameliorating somewhat Hennacy’s over-reliance on the semi-colon.</li>
                        </ul>
                        <p>There is no chapter nine. What had been chapter nine of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Autobiography of a Catholic Anarchist</i> was incorporated in abbreviated form into chapter eighteen of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Book of Ammon</i>, and so the chapters go from eight directly to ten in the original of this book. I decided not to correct this oddity so that references to particular chapters that might be found elsewhere would not lead people astray.</p>
                        <p>The epilogue really does sit correctly between chapters 21 and 22. Chapter 22 was a late addition to the book. Earlier printings ended with the epilogue after chapter 21.</p>
                        <p>
                         ―David M. Gross
                        </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
