<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Epilogue</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="epilogue" epub:type="epilogue">
			<header>
				<h2>Epilogue</h2>
			</header>
			<p>The following excerpts from Dostoevsky’s “Grand Inquisitor” seem to me timely today as when they were written many years ago. The underscored sentences are in part my emphasis. I am a Catholic who remains in the Church, but criticizes it.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p><em>He came down to the “hot pavements” of the southern town in which on the day before almost a hundred heretics had, <i xml:lang="la">ad majorem gloriam Dei</i>, been burned by the cardinal the Grand Inquisitor</em>, in a magnificant <i xml:lang="pt">auto da fé</i>, in the presence of the king, the court, the knights, the cardinals, the most charming ladies of the court, and the whole population of Seville.</p>
				<p>He came softly, unobserved, and yet, strange to say, everyone recognised Him. … The crowd weeps and kisses the earth under His feet. … He stops at the steps of the Seville cathedral at the moment when the weeping mourners are bringing in a little open white coffin. In it lies a child of seven, the only daughter of a prominent citizen. The dead child lies hidden in flowers: “He will raise your child,” the crowd shouts to the weeping mother. The priest, coming to meet the coffin, looks perplexed and frowns but the mother of the dead child throws herself at His feet with a wail, “If it is Thou, raise my child!” she cries, holding out her hands to Him. The procession halts, the coffin is laid on the steps at his feet. He looks with compassion, and His lips once more softly pronounce, “Maiden, arise!” And the maiden arises …</p>
				<p>There are cries, sobs, confusion among the people, and at that moment the cardinal himself, the <em>Grand Inquisitor</em>, passes by the cathedral. He is an old man, almost ninety, tall and erect, with a withered face and sunken eyes, in which there is still a gleam of light. He is not dressed in his gorgeous cardinal’s robes, as he was the day before, when he was burning the enemies of the Roman Church⁠—at the moment he was wearing his coarse, old, monk’s cassock. At a distance behind him come his gloomy assistants and slaves and the “holy guard.” He stops at the sight of the crowd and watches it from a distance. He sees everything; he sees them set the coffin down at His feet, sees the child rise up, and his face darkens. He knits his thick gray brows and his eyes gleam with sinister fire. He holds out his finger and bids the guards take him. And such is his power, so completely are the people cowed into submission and trembling obedience to him, that the crowd immediately make way for the guards, and in the midst of deathlike silence they lay hands on Him and lead Him away. The crowd instantly bows down to earth, like one man, before the old inquisitor. He blesses the people in silence and passes on. <em>The guards lead their prisoner to the close, gloomy vaulted prison in the ancient palace of the Holy Inquisition and shut Him in it … [T]he Grand Inquisitor himself comes in with a light in his hand …</em></p>
				<p><em>“Is it Thou? Thou?</em>… I know too well what Thou wouldst say … Why then art Thou come to hinder us? For Thou hast come to hinder us, and Thou knowest that. … <em>[T]omorrow I shall condemn Thee and burn Thee at the stake as the worst of heretics. And the very people who have today kissed Thy feet, tomorrow at the faintest sign from me will rush to heap up the embers of Thy fire …</em>”</p>
				<p>The old man has told Him he hasn’t any right to add anything to what He has said of old. One may say it is the most fundamental feature of Roman Catholicism … “All has been given by Thee to the Pope,” they say, “and all, therefore, is still in the Pope’s hands, and there is no need for Thee to come now at all. Thou must not meddle for the time, at least.” … Thou hast given us the right to bind and unbind, and now, of course, Thou canst not think of taking it away. …</p>
				<p>[Christ’s temptations after fasting 40 days:] “But seest Thou these stones in this parched and barren wilderness? Turn them into bread, and mankind will run after Thee like a flock of sheep, grateful and obedient, though forever trembling lest Thou withdraw Thy hand and deny them Thy bread.” But Thou wouldst not deprive men of freedom and didst reject the offer, thinking, what is that freedom worth, if obedience is bought by bread? … And we alone shall feed them in Thy name, declaring falsely that it is in Thy name. Oh, never, never can they feed themselves without us! … Thou didst promise them the bread of Heaven, but, I repeat again, can it compare with earthly bread in the eyes of the weak, ever sinful and ignoble race of man? And for the sake of the bread of Heaven thousands and tens of thousands shall follow Thee, what is to become of the millions and tens of thousands of millions of creatures who will not have the strength to forgo the earthly bread for the sake of heavenly? … But we shall tell them that we are Thy servants and rule them in Thy name. We shall deceive them again, for we will not let Thee come to us again. That deception will be our suffering, for we shall be forced to lie.</p>
				<p>[If Thou wouldst have given them bread they would have worshiped Thou] …Thou wouldst have satisfied the universal and everlasting craving of humanity⁠—to find someone to worship … these pitiful creatures … what is essential is that all may be <em>together</em> in it. This craving for <em>community</em> of worship is the chief misery of every man individually and of all humanity from the beginning of time. For the sake of common worship they’ve slain each other with the sword. They have set up gods and challenged one another, “Put away your gods and come and worship ours, or we shall kill you and your gods!” …</p>
				<p>…There are three powers, three powers alone, able to conquer and hold captive forever the conscience of these impotent rebels for their happiness⁠—<em>those forces are miracle, mystery, and authority</em>. Thou hast rejected all three and hast set the example for doing so. …</p>
				<p>[Second Temptation of Christ⁠—Cast Thyself down from the pinnacle of the Temple.] …And couldst Thou believe for one moment that men, too, could face such a temptation? Is the nature of men such, that they can reject miracle, and at the great moments of their lives, the moments of their deepest, most agonizing spiritual difficulties, cling only to the free verdict of the heart? … Thou didst not come down from the cross … for again, Thou wouldst not enslave man by a miracle. … Thou didst crave for free love and not the base raptures of the slave before the might that has overawed him forever. But Thou didst think too highly of men therein, for they are slaves, of course, though rebellious by nature. … <em>Canst Thou have simply come to the elect and for the elect? … We have corrected Thy work and have founded it upon miracle, mystery, and authority.</em> And men rejoiced that they were again led like sheep … Be angry. I don’t want Thy love, for I love Thee not. … Listen, then. We are not working with Thee, but with <em>him</em>⁠—that is our mystery. It’s long⁠—eight centuries⁠—since we have been on <em>his</em> side and not Thine … We took from him Rome and the sword of Caesar, and proclaimed ourselves sole rulers of the earth … [W]e shall triumph and shall be Caesars, and then we shall plan the universal happiness of man. But Thou mightest have taken even then the sword of Caesar. Why didst Thou reject that last gift? Hadst Thou accepted that last counsel of the mighty spirit, Thou wouldst have accomplished all that man seeks on earth⁠—that is, someone to worship, someone to keep his conscience, and some means of uniting all in one unanimous and harmonious ant-heap … Hadst Thou taken the world and Caesar’s purple, Thou wouldst have founded the universal state and have given universal peace … <em>We have taken the sword of Caesar, and in taking it, of course, have rejected Thee and followed <em>him</em>…</em> Thou art proud of Thine elect, but Thou hast only the elect, while we give rest to all. … [H]ow many of those elect … have grown weary waiting for Thee … [S]ome of them, the fierce and rebellious, will destroy themselves, others, rebellious but weak, will destroy one another, while the rest, weak and unhappy, will crawl fawning to our feet and whine to us, “Yes, you were right, you alone possess His mystery, and we come back to you, save us from ourselves!”</p>
				<p>…Oh, we shall allow them even sin, they are weak and helpless, and they will love us like children because we allow them to sin. We shall tell them that every sin shall be expiated, if it is done with our permission, that we allow them to sin because we love them, and the punishment for these sins we take upon ourselves. … And all will be happy, all the millions of creatures except the hundred thousand who rule over them. For only we, we who guard the mystery, shall be unhappy. … the curse of the knowledge of good and evil. Peacefully they will die, peacefully they will expire in Thy name, and beyond the grave they will find nothing but death. But we shall keep the secret, and for their happiness we shall allure them with the reward of heaven and eternity. … And we who have taken their sins upon us for their happiness will stand up before Thee and say: “Judge us if Thou canst and darest.” Know that I fear Thee not. Know that I too have been in the wilderness, I too have lived on roots and locusts, I too prized the freedom with which Thou hast blessed men, and I too was striving to stand among Thy elect, among the strong and powerful, thirsting “to make up the number.” But I awakened and would not serve madness. I turned back and <em>joined the ranks of those who have corrected Thy work</em>. I left the proud and went back to the humble, for the happiness of the humble. … [T]omorrow <em>Thou shalt see that obedient flock who at a sign from me will hasten to heap up the hot cinders about the pile on which I shall burn Thee for coming to hinder us. For if anyone has ever deserved our fires, it is Thou. Tomorrow I shall burn Thee. <i xml:lang="la">Dixi.</i></em></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p><em>The Grand Inquisitor does not believe in God but as he says has long worshiped the devil, so he suffers</em> as must those who “accept lying and deception, and lead men consciously to death and destruction, and yet deceive them all the way so that they may not notice where they are being led, that the poor blind creatures may at least on the way think themselves happy.”</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>He saw that the Prisoner had listened intently all the time, looking gently in his face and evidently not wishing to reply. The old man longed for Him to say something, however bitter and terrible. <em>But He suddenly approached the old man in silence and softly kissed him on his bloodless aged lips.</em> That was all his answer. The old man shuddered. His lips moved. He went to the door, opened it, and said to Him: “Go, and come no more … come not at all, never, never!” And he let Him out into the dark alleys of the town. The Prisoner went away.</p>
				<p>“And the old man?”</p>
				<p>“The kiss glows in his heart, but the old man adheres to his idea.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p> All Christian churches deny Christ, and the worst is the Catholic. Most church leaders have been so brainwashed that they do not know this, so they are not to be blamed when they kill or silence what they call heresy, for they do not know any better. They are not to be feared or obeyed though by <em>real</em> Christians when they follow the Grand Inquisitor and his master the devil to found the “universal state and universal peace” based on executions, excommunications, exploitation, and war, we Christian anarchists who know better will not follow them. We shall continue to insist upon the primacy of the individual conscience; upon a reliance on the Sermon on the Mount rather than ecclesiastical pomp and power. We know that we are following Him, rather than denying Him in His name. Neither should we who know all this punish folks like the Grand Inquisitor, for Christ did not punish him, even when he was going to burn Him, as they did <abbr>St.</abbr> Joan of Arc later, but returned good for evil and kissed him. </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
