<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>A Final Word from the Author</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="finalword" epub:type="afterword">
			<h2>A Final Word from the Author</h2>
			<p>I had received several notices from the health department to close down the Joe Hill House. An article in the paper said that I was not allowed to sleep more than ten people on the floor. I asked the inspector what he would do if I had eleven. He said he would padlock the door. I told him I would break the padlock and beat him like Brigham Young beat the army, and in mock anger I led him to the door and told him to “get the hell out of here.” I spoke to Commissioner Smart and he asked me to present my appeal to the City Commissioners. I did so and Smart said I was saving the city money by putting up tramps. And Mayor Brack Lee said that they would go easy on the regulations for I was doing good work; they didn’t want to put me in jail for disobeying their regulations, and he said facetiously that they would have to make an ordinance allowing me to do just what I was doing. A few days later I spoke to a group of social workers meeting at the Salvation Army and I was asked by a minister if I rehabilitated derelicts. In effect I said, “Hell, I haven’t rehabilitated myself yet.” I did this to scorn their Bible-banging. The next day I received a notice from my landlady to vacate the place. Whether the pious or the law, or between them, had pressured the landlord to chase me I do not know. I tried to rent another place but the inspector told the landlord to give me back my money unless he wanted to spend money fixing the place up. When the inspector found that I was really moving he smilingly said that he would be around to help me when I came back. He could afford to smile for I was on the move. I told him he would try to screw me for I knew his kind. I stored my belongings in three different places and on February 10th went on a speaking trip.</p>
			<p>First I went to California, then a week at Cornell University, being invited by a Jew, a Mormon, and a Catholic priest. Then, with a friend, I made the $99 bus trip from Minneapolis to Seattle, San Diego, El Paso, Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr>, New York City, Buffalo, and back to Minneapolis. Then my friend drove me in half a dozen states in the Middle West. As Poulsen was to be executed May, 13 I began a 25-day fast in Madison, Wisconsin, cutting my trip short to get in Salt Lake City three days before the execution. Fasting, speaking several times a day, and talking to folks nearly all the time was very difficult, and I will not do it again. I also spoke in Vancouver and Toronto. Poulsen’s lawyer got him a reprieve and on November 16th made his oral appeal to the state supreme court. Within 60 days they will make an answer, and within another 60 days the judge in Provo will set another execution date if the appeal has failed. So I will be picketing again for him.</p>
			<p>I found that renting a place would only be more trouble, so two people sent me money and I paid $900 down on this $9,000 brick house <em>this side</em> of the tracks. My payments are $80 a month. I am four blocks from a tavern and few town bums walk the mile or more from downtown. It is, as it should be, a place for transients. About 35 is the limit I can handle.</p>
			<p>I wish to thank the following who have helped me financially to get this first printing of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Book of Ammon</i> off the press: Janet Burwash, Bob Callagy, Dorothy Day, Helen Ford, and Peter Lumsden; to my daughter Carmen who suggested the title, and to Lynn Birkinshaw, my Mormon printer of the Sun Lithographing Company, and to his brother Bill who successfully produced the cuts in the book from old scratched pictures. To my co-workers and fellow Catholic conscientious objectors who are helping me until they are called to prison: Murphy Dowois (the Cajun) and Paul Mann. Also to the merchants, mostly Mormon, who give me food. The paragraph at the end of my citations in the chapter on the Mormons is from my friend William J. Whalen of Purdue University, gathered from his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Latter Day Saints in the Modern Day World</i>, John Day <abbr>Co.</abbr> 1964.</p>
			<p>This book has been written, first in the turmoil of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Catholic Worker</i> in New York City, then at the Old Pioneer’s farm near Phoenix by oil lamp light, and the last eight chapters at the Joe Hill House here. All this amidst my fasting and picketing so there are typos, and grammatical mistakes that would make a pedant shiver, but I submit that, taken as a whole, as our lives will be judged by God finally, the book is authentic.</p>
			<p>To the orthodox Catholic who may be scandalized by the tone of the book, and especially by the Epilogue, and to the orthodox radical who looks askance at my religious emphasis, I will say that this terribly acute conscience of mine accepts the basis of what Jesus taught; that I feel at home with the Spirit of <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis, <abbr>St.</abbr> Martin of Tours, and Pope John <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span> and consider myself a good Catholic, although critical of some Church rules, many of which eventually will be changed. To the seeming paradox of being a Catholic Anarchist I will add that my favorite saint is <abbr>St.</abbr> Joan of Arc, for she fought the English and the Church and didn’t chicken out. It is not what you believe but if you are willing to die for your belief. And to live for it. To the radical I will say that Christ, Buddha, and Gandhi are essentially more radical than Marx and Bakunin.</p>
			<p>To the reader who will see a repetition of thoughts and quotations, I have done this for emphasis. I neglected to say that the picture on page 32 [pictures not included in this ebook] is that of a passport of my wife and myself taken in 1923. And the picture on page 42 is that of Carmen and myself, and our cow, June, at Bisanakee in 1928. To my Mormon friends, regular and polygamous; to the transients with whom I live, I say that I am happy to live in Salt Lake City. At the nominal price of $3 for this book little money will be made, but any profits will go for this lasting memorial to Joe Hill, rebel tramp and poet.</p>
			<p>A final word on the recent election. Many radicals voted for Johnson for fear of Goldwater. Hannah Arendt has given them the answer: “He who chooses the lesser of two evils, quickly forgets that he chose evil.” Johnson did not need the votes of radicals. They should remember the story of Chicken Little who led herself and small-brained fowl into the den of the fox because she was afraid of something that never happened. Those who voted for Johnson have asked in advance for war in Viet Nam and Cuba, and the protection of capitalism in Brazil, Formosa, and wherever it weakens.</p>
			<p>The Vatican Council has adjourned again. It began with glowing hopes under Pope John, and it has now proven, through its bypassing of important subjects, and its emphasis on Mary. that deeds and not words are required. As saints have said: “The Church is Christ in the world and it must needs be crucified as He was.” The sad part is that Christ was innocent of evil and was killed because He was a friend of the poor and disposed, while the Church is guilty, being an apologist for the rich and powerful.</p>
			<p>Poulsen lost his appeal to the state supreme court.</p>
			<p>In Christ the Rebel,<br/> Ammon Hennacy</p>
			<p>1131 South 1st West. Salt Lake City, Utah<br/> (Mailing address <abbr class="initialism">P.O.</abbr> Box 655).<br/> December 11. 1964.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
